{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 6.3.9600}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\qj\ul\fs40\lang2057 NetHack 4 License Information\ulnone\f1\fs22\par
\f0\par
The NetHack 4 engine and interface are licensed under the NetHack General Public License. This license gives you the right to redistribute and modify it, so long as you obey certain terms and conditions. The full text of the NGPL is given later in this document.\par
\par
NetHack 4 also uses certain libraries: libuncursed, zlib, libjansson, and (if you install the GUI support) SDL2 and libpng. (libpng is also used by the tileset compiler.) libuncursed is multi-licensed, offering the NGPL as one possible license, and is used here under the NGPL. The other libraries have other licenses, given later in this document.\par
\par
Installing GUI support allows you to play in a "fake terminal", rather than just on the console. If you install a tileset, it will also allow you to play with a map represented by "tiles" images rather than text. One of these tilesets, "Slash'EM", is licensed under the NGPL. The others have licenses of their own, given later in this document.\par
\par
The documentation is also under this license (except where it quotes existing licenses verbatim), and \'a9 Alex Smith 2013, 2014.\par
\par
For a more detailed version of this document, including the individual copyright status of every source file, see the "copyright-details.txt" file after installation (in the "nethack4\\doc" subdirectory of your Program Files directory). You can find this file as "license.rtf" in the same subdirectory after installation.\par
\par
There is \b no warranty\b0  for NetHack 4 or any of its component parts.\par
\par
\i\fs32 NetHack General Public License\par

\pard\qj\i0\fs22 The NetHack 4 engine and interface are \'a9 Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam, 1985; \'a9 Alex Smith 2010-2014; \'a9 Daniel Thaler 2011-2012; and many other contributors. The full list of contributors is available in the "history" document, viewable in-game.\par
\par
The tiles compiler is also under this license, and \'a9 Alex Smith 2014; \'a9 Andrew Apted <ajapted@users.sourceforge.net> 2002; \'a9 Slash'EM Development Team 2003; \'a9 Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam, 1985; \'a9 Robert Patrick Rankin 1991.\par
\par
The Slash'EM tileset and the font used by the fake tiles port are also under this license. The full list of artists is unknown, but believed to include: Warwick Allison; Mitsuhiro Ikatura; Haruko Numata; Edger; ZMYDaino; Wan'ichi; Tatsuya; Kelly Youngblood; Paul Pliska; John Harris; Andrew Walker; and Alex Smith. Known copyright dates range from 2000 to 2014. For more information, see the "copyright.txt" file after installation.\i\fs32\par

\pard\qj\i0\f1\fs18\par

\pard                     NETHACK GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE\par
                    (Copyright 1989 M. Stephenson)\par
\par
               (Based on the BISON general public license,\par
                   copyright 1988 Richard M. Stallman)\par
\par
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this\par
license, but changing it is not allowed.  You can also use this wording to\par
make the terms for other programs.\par
\par
  The license agreements of most software companies keep you at the mercy of\par
those companies.  By contrast, our general public license is intended to give\par
everyone the right to share NetHack.  To make sure that you get the rights we\par
want you to have, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you\par
these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.  Hence this license\par
agreement.\par
\par
  Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to give away\par
copies of NetHack, that you receive source code or else can get it if you\par
want it, that you can change NetHack or use pieces of it in new free\par
programs, and that you know you can do these things.\par
\par
  To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to\par
deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute copies\par
of NetHack, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have.  You\par
must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.  And you\par
must tell them their rights.\par
\par
  Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds out\par
that there is no warranty for NetHack.  If NetHack is modified by someone\par
else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is\par
not what we distributed.\par
\par
  Therefore we (Mike Stephenson and other holders of NetHack copyrights) make\par
the following terms which say what you must do to be allowed to distribute or\par
change NetHack.\par
\par
\par
                        COPYING POLICIES\par
\par
  1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of NetHack source code as\par
you receive it, in any medium, provided that you keep intact the notices on\par
all files that refer to copyrights, to this License Agreement, and to the\par
absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the NetHack\par
program a copy of this License Agreement along with the program.\par
\par
  2. You may modify your copy or copies of NetHack or any portion of it, and\par
copy and distribute such modifications under the terms of Paragraph 1 above\par
(including distributing this License Agreement), provided that you also do the\par
following:\par
\par
    a) cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you\par
    changed the files and the date of any change; and\par
\par
    b) cause the whole of any work that you distribute or publish, that in\par
    whole or in part contains or is a derivative of NetHack or any part\par
    thereof, to be licensed at no charge to all third parties on terms\par
    identical to those contained in this License Agreement (except that you\par
    may choose to grant more extensive warranty protection to some or all\par
    third parties, at your option)\par
\par
    c) You may charge a distribution fee for the physical act of\par
    transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection\par
    in exchange for a fee.\par
\par
  3. You may copy and distribute NetHack (or a portion or derivative of it,\par
under Paragraph 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of\par
Paragraphs 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:\par
\par
    a) accompany it with the complete machine-readable source code, which\par
    must be distributed under the terms of Paragraphs 1 and 2 above; or,\par
\par
    b) accompany it with full information as to how to obtain the complete\par
    machine-readable source code from an appropriate archive site.  (This\par
    alternative is allowed only for noncommercial distribution.)\par
\par
For these purposes, complete source code means either the full source\par
distribution as originally released over Usenet or updated copies of the\par
files in this distribution used to create the object code or executable.\par
\par
  4. You may not copy, sublicense, distribute or transfer NetHack except as\par
expressly provided under this License Agreement.  Any attempt otherwise to\par
copy, sublicense, distribute or transfer NetHack is void and your rights to\par
use the program under this License agreement shall be automatically\par
terminated.  However, parties who have received computer software programs\par
from you with this License Agreement will not have their licenses terminated\par
so long as such parties remain in full compliance.\par
\par
\par
Stated plainly:  You are permitted to modify NetHack, or otherwise use parts\par
of NetHack, provided that you comply with the conditions specified above;\par
in particular, your modified NetHack or program containing parts of NetHack\par
must remain freely available as provided in this License Agreement.  In\par
other words, go ahead and share NetHack, but don't try to stop anyone else\par
from sharing it farther.\par

\pard\fs22\par

\pard\qj\i\f0\fs32 The zlib License\par

\pard\i0\fs22 This license is used by zlib (\'a9 1995-2012 Jean-loup Gailly and Mark Adler) and SDL2 (\'a91997-2012 Sam Lantinga <slouken@libsdl.org>).\par
\f1\par

\pard\fs18 This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied\par
warranty.  In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages\par
arising from the use of this software.\par
\par
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose,\par
including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it\par
freely, subject to the following restrictions:\par
\par
1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not\par
   claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software\par
   in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be\par
   appreciated but is not required.\par
2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be\par
   misrepresented as being the original software.\par
3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.\par

\pard\fs22\par

\pard\qj\i\f0\fs32 The Expat License\par
\i0\fs22 This license is used by libjansson, which is \'a9 2009-2011 Petri Lehtinen <petri@digip.org>.\par

\pard\f1\fs18\par
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy\par
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal\par
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights\par
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell\par
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is\par
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:\par
\par
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in\par
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.\par
\par
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR\par
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,\par
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE\par
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER\par
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,\par
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN\par
THE SOFTWARE.\par

\pard\fs22\par

\pard\qj\i\f0\fs32 The libpng Copyright and License\par

\pard\qj\i0\fs22 This is the copyright and license situation for libpng:\f1\par

\pard\fs18 This copy of the libpng notices is provided for your convenience.  In case of\par
any discrepancy between this copy and the notices in the file png.h that is\par
included in the libpng distribution, the latter shall prevail.\par
\par
COPYRIGHT NOTICE, DISCLAIMER, and LICENSE:\par
\par
If you modify libpng you may insert additional notices immediately following\par
this sentence.\par
\par
This code is released under the libpng license.\par
\par
libpng versions 1.2.6, August 15, 2004, through 1.5.10, March 29, 2012, are\par
Copyright (c) 2004, 2006-2011 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are\par
distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-1.2.5\par
with the following individual added to the list of Contributing Authors\par
\par
   Cosmin Truta\par
\par
libpng versions 1.0.7, July 1, 2000, through 1.2.5 - October 3, 2002, are\par
Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are\par
distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-1.0.6\par
with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors\par
\par
   Simon-Pierre Cadieux\par
   Eric S. Raymond\par
   Gilles Vollant\par
\par
and with the following additions to the disclaimer:\par
\par
   There is no warranty against interference with your enjoyment of the\par
   library or against infringement.  There is no warranty that our\par
   efforts or the library will fulfill any of your particular purposes\par
   or needs.  This library is provided with all faults, and the entire\par
   risk of satisfactory quality, performance, accuracy, and effort is with\par
   the user.\par
\par
libpng versions 0.97, January 1998, through 1.0.6, March 20, 2000, are\par
Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are\par
distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-0.96,\par
with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors:\par
\par
   Tom Lane\par
   Glenn Randers-Pehrson\par
   Willem van Schaik\par
\par
libpng versions 0.89, June 1996, through 0.96, May 1997, are\par
Copyright (c) 1996, 1997 Andreas Dilger\par
Distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-0.88,\par
with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors:\par
\par
   John Bowler\par
   Kevin Bracey\par
   Sam Bushell\par
   Magnus Holmgren\par
   Greg Roelofs\par
   Tom Tanner\par
\par
libpng versions 0.5, May 1995, through 0.88, January 1996, are\par
Copyright (c) 1995, 1996 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc.\par
\par
For the purposes of this copyright and license, "Contributing Authors"\par
is defined as the following set of individuals:\par
\par
   Andreas Dilger\par
   Dave Martindale\par
   Guy Eric Schalnat\par
   Paul Schmidt\par
   Tim Wegner\par
\par
The PNG Reference Library is supplied "AS IS".  The Contributing Authors\par
and Group 42, Inc. disclaim all warranties, expressed or implied,\par
including, without limitation, the warranties of merchantability and of\par
fitness for any purpose.  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc.\par
assume no liability for direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary,\par
or consequential damages, which may result from the use of the PNG\par
Reference Library, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.\par
\par
Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this\par
source code, or portions hereof, for any purpose, without fee, subject\par
to the following restrictions:\par
\par
1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.\par
\par
2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not\par
   be misrepresented as being the original source.\par
\par
3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any\par
   source or altered source distribution.\par
\par
The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. specifically permit, without\par
fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component to\par
supporting the PNG file format in commercial products.  If you use this\par
source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be\par
appreciated.\par

\pard\fs22\par

\pard\qj\i\f0\fs32 Copyright of the DawnLike Tileset\par

\pard\qj\i0\fs22 The DawnLike tileset is \'a9 Andrew Rios 2014 (art), \'a9 Alex Smith 2014 (tile selection and organization). The tiles are licensed under a mix of Creative Commons licenses: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported (tiles originally from an older version, DawnHack), and Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (tiles from DawnLike). Here's what the artist had to say about the copyright status:\f1\par

\pard\par

\pard\fs18 Dawnlike is registered under a CC-BY-SA 3.0 license, meaning that you\par
are free to redistribute or edit any part of this tileset as long as\par
you do not take the credit for it. I cannot stop you from using this\par
tileset commercially, so feel free to sell any games using Dawnlike.\par
\par
If you use this tileset you must accredit DawnBringer. That mad\par
color-bending genius came up with the palette this entire pack lives\par
on. Without his palette, I would probably never would have even\par
finished DawnHack. As for crediting me, I have a unique\par
request. Inside "Reptiles.png" you will find a Platino sprite. If you\par
use Dawnlike, you MUST use this sprite and hide him very well!\par

\pard\qj\f0\fs22\par

\pard\qj You can view the Creative Commons licenses in question at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ }}{\fldrslt{http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  (Attribution) and {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ }}{\fldrslt{http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs22  (Attribution-Share Alike), or by sending a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California 94105, USA.\par
\par
\i\fs32 Copyright of the RLTiles Tileset\par
\i0\fs22 The version of the RLTiles tileset in NetHack 4 was produced by Raz in 2014, with some coding by Alex Smith. It was derived from the original version of RLTiles, which had the following license information:\par
\par

\pard\f1\fs18 You can use these tilesets in your program freely. Please include the\par
following text in your distribution package, either as a separate\par
file or incorpolated into your license notice document. The fourth\par
line is optional: Delete it if you have not modified the tiles. If\par
you have modified some of the tiles, replace "YOURNAME" by your name.\par

\pard\qj\f0\fs22\par

\pard\f1\fs18 Part of (or All) the graphic tiles used in this program is the public\par
domain roguelike tileset "RLTiles".\par
Some of the tiles have been modified by Raz.\par
\par
You can find the original tileset at:\par
{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://rltiles.sf.net }}{\fldrslt{http://rltiles.sf.net\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs18\par
\par
The list of contributors to the original RLTiles was:\par
\par
Denzi\par
=========\par
dwarf lord, watchman, watch captain, page, raven,\par
*About half of the Dungeon Crawl tiles*\par
*Allmost all the player tiles*\par
\par
Alex Korol\par
=========\par
dc/abomination*.bmp, 64x64 stairs tile, 64x64 swamp dragon\par
\par
Edger\par
=========\par
Cerberus\par
\par
Wan-ichi\par
=========\par
werejackal, werewolf, leocrotta, wumpus,\par
titanothere, baluchitherium, wererat\par
\par
So-Miya\par
=========\par
chickatrice, pyrolisk, vampire, vampire mage\par
storm giant, silver dragon scale mail, shimmering dragon scale mail\par
silver dragon scales, shimmering dragon scales, baby shimmering dragon\par
shimmering dragon, baby silver dragon, silver dragon\par
master mind flayer, leather cloak, magcal explosions\par
\par
Haruko Numata\par
=========\par
rope golem, leather golem, flesh golem, clay golem\par
stone golem, horned devil,\par
Lord Carnarvon, Pelias, Shaman Karnov, Hippocrates,\par
King Arthur, Arch Priest, Master of Thieves, Norn, Wizard of Balance,\par
low boots, iron shoes, high boots, combat boots, jungle boots,\par
hiking boots, mud boots\par
\par
Tatsuya\par
=========\par
knight(3D), samurai(3D), barbarian(3D)\par
hill giant(3D), dragons(3D)\par
\par
from AllegroHack (Kelly Youngblood, Paul Pliska, John Harris)\par
=========\par
gas spore, flaming sphere, shocking sphere\par
\par
Dainokata\par
=========\par
warg, manes, shrieker,\par
water moccasin, elf zombie,human zombie,\par
straw golem, iron golem, wererat, shopkeeper,\par
guard, iguana, caveman, healer, rogue,\par
tourist, dart, aklys, elven bow,\par
orcish bow, elven cloak,\par
orcish cloak, opera cloak, sack,\par
lock pick, lamp, blindfold, towel,\par
leash, stethoscope, tinning kit, figurine,\par
cram ration, food ration, statue, alter, sink\par
\par
Zmy\par
=========\par
dog, large dog, bugbear, rothe, ape, owlbear,\par
skeleton, Woodland-elf, Green-elf, Grey-elf,\par
Croesus, marilith, vrock, hezrou, nalfeshnee, Orcus,\par
Demogorgon, cavewoman, Elwing, dwarvish mattock,\par
pickaxe, Kop Lieutenant, Kop Sergeant, elf-lord\par
Oracle, Archon, Snake, pyton, cobra, Earendil\par
\fs22\par
}
 