=encoding utf8

=begin comment

 This file is Copyright (C) Alex Smith 2014-2015

 Parts of this file that quote other license agreements verbatim are
 under the same licenses as those licenses.  Those licenses which even
 have an explicit license agreement (which, in the case of the
 licenses in this file, is embedded into the licenses themselves)
 typically allow redistribution of the license, but only without
 modifications (here interpreted as allowing embedding into a larger
 document, including reversible changes to the sequence of bytes that
 make up the license, that do not lose or hide any meaning).  When a
 license does not have an explicit license agreement, I'm assuming
 that the typical legal requirement to preserve copyright and license
 notices also carries implicit permission to copy those notices (so as
 to be able to preserve them).  The copyright statement above does not
 apply to verbatim quotes of other licenses, and is not intended to
 challenge their copyright status.
 
 As for parts of this file that are not quoting other license
 agreements, I hereby license anyone to copy and distribute them,
 either verbatim or with modifications, so long as the authorship of
 modified copies is not misrepresented.
 
 THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THIS COPYRIGHT INFORMATION FILE.  IT HAS NOT
 BEEN THOROUGHLY CHECKED FOR ACCURACY, AND MAY WELL CONTAIN MISTAKES.
 USE IT AT YOUR OWN RISK.

=end comment

=for aimake eula

=head1 NetHack 4 License Information

The NetHack 4 engine and interface are licensed under the NetHack
General Public License (NGPL). This license gives you the right to
redistribute and modify it, so long as you obey certain terms and
conditions. The full text of the NGPL is given later in this document.

NetHack 4 also uses certain libraries: libuncursed, zlib, libjansson,
and (if you install the GUI support) SDL2 and libpng. (libpng is also
used by the tileset compiler.) libuncursed is multi-licensed, offering
the NGPL as one possible license, and is used here under the NGPL. The
other libraries have other licenses, given later in this document.

Installing GUI support allows you to play in a "fake terminal", rather
than just on the console. If you install a tileset, it will also allow
you to play with a map represented by "tiles" images rather than
text. One of these tilesets, "Slash'EM", is licensed under the
NGPL. The others have licenses of their own, given later in this
document.

The documentation is also under this license (except where it quotes
existing licenses verbatim), and © Alex Smith 2013, 2014, 2015.

For a more detailed version of this document, including the individual
copyright status of every source file, see the "copyright-details.txt"
file after installation (in the "nethack4\doc" subdirectory of your
Program Files directory). You can find this file as "license.rtf" in
the same subdirectory after installation.

There is B<no warranty> for NetHack 4 or any of its component parts.

=head2 NetHack General Public License

The NetHack 4 engine and interface are © Stichting Mathematisch
Centrum, Amsterdam, 1985; © Alex Smith 2010-2015; © Daniel Thaler
2011-2012; and many other contributors. The full list of contributors
is available in the "history" document, viewable in-game.

The tiles compiler is also under this license, and © Alex Smith 2014;
© Andrew Apted <ajapted@users.sourceforge.net> 2002; © Slash'EM
Development Team 2003; © Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam,
1985; © Robert Patrick Rankin 1991.

The Slash'EM tileset and the font used by the fake tiles port are also
under this license. The full list of artists is unknown, but believed
to include: Warwick Allison; Mitsuhiro Ikatura; Haruko Numata; Edger;
ZMYDaino; Wan'ichi; Tatsuya; Kelly Youngblood; Paul Pliska; John
Harris; Andrew Walker; and Alex Smith. Known copyright dates range
from 2000 to 2014. For more information, see the "copyright.txt" file
after installation.

                     NETHACK GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                     (Copyright 1989 M. Stephenson)
 
                (Based on the BISON general public license,
                    copyright 1988 Richard M. Stallman)
 
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
 license, but changing it is not allowed.  You can also use this wording to
 make the terms for other programs.
 
   The license agreements of most software companies keep you at the mercy of
 those companies.  By contrast, our general public license is intended to give
 everyone the right to share NetHack.  To make sure that you get the rights we
 want you to have, we need to make restrictions that forbid anyone to deny you
 these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.  Hence this license
 agreement.
 
   Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to give away
 copies of NetHack, that you receive source code or else can get it if you
 want it, that you can change NetHack or use pieces of it in new free
 programs, and that you know you can do these things.
 
   To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to
 deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute copies
 of NetHack, you must give the recipients all the rights that you have.  You
 must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source code.  And you
 must tell them their rights.
 
   Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds out
 that there is no warranty for NetHack.  If NetHack is modified by someone
 else and passed on, we want its recipients to know that what they have is
 not what we distributed.
 
   Therefore we (Mike Stephenson and other holders of NetHack copyrights) make
 the following terms which say what you must do to be allowed to distribute or
 change NetHack.
 
 
                         COPYING POLICIES
 
   1. You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of NetHack source code as
 you receive it, in any medium, provided that you keep intact the notices on
 all files that refer to copyrights, to this License Agreement, and to the
 absence of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the NetHack
 program a copy of this License Agreement along with the program.
 
   2. You may modify your copy or copies of NetHack or any portion of it, and
 copy and distribute such modifications under the terms of Paragraph 1 above
 (including distributing this License Agreement), provided that you also do the
 following:
 
     a) cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating that you
     changed the files and the date of any change; and
 
     b) cause the whole of any work that you distribute or publish, that in
     whole or in part contains or is a derivative of NetHack or any part
     thereof, to be licensed at no charge to all third parties on terms
     identical to those contained in this License Agreement (except that you
     may choose to grant more extensive warranty protection to some or all
     third parties, at your option)
 
     c) You may charge a distribution fee for the physical act of
     transferring a copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection
     in exchange for a fee.
 
   3. You may copy and distribute NetHack (or a portion or derivative of it,
 under Paragraph 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
 Paragraphs 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:
 
     a) accompany it with the complete machine-readable source code, which
     must be distributed under the terms of Paragraphs 1 and 2 above; or,
 
     b) accompany it with full information as to how to obtain the complete
     machine-readable source code from an appropriate archive site.  (This
     alternative is allowed only for noncommercial distribution.)
 
 For these purposes, complete source code means either the full source
 distribution as originally released over Usenet or updated copies of the
 files in this distribution used to create the object code or executable.
 
   4. You may not copy, sublicense, distribute or transfer NetHack except as
 expressly provided under this License Agreement.  Any attempt otherwise to
 copy, sublicense, distribute or transfer NetHack is void and your rights to
 use the program under this License agreement shall be automatically
 terminated.  However, parties who have received computer software programs
 from you with this License Agreement will not have their licenses terminated
 so long as such parties remain in full compliance.
 
 
 Stated plainly:  You are permitted to modify NetHack, or otherwise use parts
 of NetHack, provided that you comply with the conditions specified above;
 in particular, your modified NetHack or program containing parts of NetHack
 must remain freely available as provided in this License Agreement.  In
 other words, go ahead and share NetHack, but don't try to stop anyone else
 from sharing it farther.

=head2 zlib License

This license is used by zlib (© 1995-2012 Jean-loup Gailly and Mark
Adler) and SDL2 (© 1997-2012 Sam Lantinga <slouken@libsdl.org>).

 This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied
 warranty.  In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages
 arising from the use of this software.
 
 Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose,
 including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it
 freely, subject to the following restrictions:
 
 1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not
    claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software
    in a product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be
    appreciated but is not required.
 2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be
    misrepresented as being the original software.
 3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.

=head2 The Expat License

This license is used by libjansson, which is © 2009-2011 Petri
Lehtinen <petri@digip.org>.

 Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
 of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
 in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
 to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
 copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
 furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
 
 The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
 all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
 
 THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
 IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
 FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
 AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
 LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
 OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
 THE SOFTWARE.

=head2 The libpng Copyright and License

This is the copyright and license situation for libpng:

 This copy of the libpng notices is provided for your convenience.  In case of
 any discrepancy between this copy and the notices in the file png.h that is
 included in the libpng distribution, the latter shall prevail.
 
 COPYRIGHT NOTICE, DISCLAIMER, and LICENSE:
 
 If you modify libpng you may insert additional notices immediately following
 this sentence.
 
 This code is released under the libpng license.
 
 libpng versions 1.2.6, August 15, 2004, through 1.5.10, March 29, 2012, are
 Copyright (c) 2004, 2006-2011 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are
 distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-1.2.5
 with the following individual added to the list of Contributing Authors
 
    Cosmin Truta
 
 libpng versions 1.0.7, July 1, 2000, through 1.2.5 - October 3, 2002, are
 Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are
 distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-1.0.6
 with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors
 
    Simon-Pierre Cadieux
    Eric S. Raymond
    Gilles Vollant
 
 and with the following additions to the disclaimer:
 
    There is no warranty against interference with your enjoyment of the
    library or against infringement.  There is no warranty that our
    efforts or the library will fulfill any of your particular purposes
    or needs.  This library is provided with all faults, and the entire
    risk of satisfactory quality, performance, accuracy, and effort is with
    the user.
 
 libpng versions 0.97, January 1998, through 1.0.6, March 20, 2000, are
 Copyright (c) 1998, 1999 Glenn Randers-Pehrson, and are
 distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-0.96,
 with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors:
 
    Tom Lane
    Glenn Randers-Pehrson
    Willem van Schaik
 
 libpng versions 0.89, June 1996, through 0.96, May 1997, are
 Copyright (c) 1996, 1997 Andreas Dilger
 Distributed according to the same disclaimer and license as libpng-0.88,
 with the following individuals added to the list of Contributing Authors:
 
    John Bowler
    Kevin Bracey
    Sam Bushell
    Magnus Holmgren
    Greg Roelofs
    Tom Tanner
 
 libpng versions 0.5, May 1995, through 0.88, January 1996, are
 Copyright (c) 1995, 1996 Guy Eric Schalnat, Group 42, Inc.
 
 For the purposes of this copyright and license, "Contributing Authors"
 is defined as the following set of individuals:
 
    Andreas Dilger
    Dave Martindale
    Guy Eric Schalnat
    Paul Schmidt
    Tim Wegner
 
 The PNG Reference Library is supplied "AS IS".  The Contributing Authors
 and Group 42, Inc. disclaim all warranties, expressed or implied,
 including, without limitation, the warranties of merchantability and of
 fitness for any purpose.  The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc.
 assume no liability for direct, indirect, incidental, special, exemplary,
 or consequential damages, which may result from the use of the PNG
 Reference Library, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.
 
 Permission is hereby granted to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
 source code, or portions hereof, for any purpose, without fee, subject
 to the following restrictions:
 
 1. The origin of this source code must not be misrepresented.
 
 2. Altered versions must be plainly marked as such and must not
    be misrepresented as being the original source.
 
 3. This Copyright notice may not be removed or altered from any
    source or altered source distribution.
 
 The Contributing Authors and Group 42, Inc. specifically permit, without
 fee, and encourage the use of this source code as a component to
 supporting the PNG file format in commercial products.  If you use this
 source code in a product, acknowledgment is not required but would be
 appreciated.

=head2 Copyright of the DawnLike Tileset

The DawnLike tileset is © Andrew Rios 2014 (art), © Alex Smith 2014
(tile selection and organization). The tiles are licensed under a mix
of Creative Commons licenses: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
Unported (tiles originally from an older version, DawnHack), and
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported (tiles from
DawnLike). Here's what the artist had to say about the copyright
status:

 Dawnlike is registered under a CC-BY-SA 3.0 license, meaning that you
 are free to redistribute or edit any part of this tileset as long as
 you do not take the credit for it. I cannot stop you from using this
 tileset commercially, so feel free to sell any games using Dawnlike.
 
 If you use this tileset you must accredit DawnBringer. That mad
 color-bending genius came up with the palette this entire pack lives
 on. Without his palette, I would probably never would have even
 finished DawnHack. As for crediting me, I have a unique
 request. Inside "Reptiles.png" you will find a Platino sprite. If you
 use Dawnlike, you MUST use this sprite and hide him very well!

You can view the Creative Commons licenses in question at
L<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/> (Attribution) and
L<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/> (Attribution-Share
Alike), or by sending a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street,
Suite 300, San Francisco, California 94105, USA.

=head2 Copyright of the RLTiles Tileset

The version of the RLTiles tileset in NetHack 4 was produced by Raz in
2014 and 2015, with some coding by Alex Smith. It was derived from the
original version of RLTiles, which had the following license
information:

 You can use these tilesets in your program freely. Please include the
 following text in your distribution package, either as a separate
 file or incorpolated into your license notice document. The fourth
 line is optional: Delete it if you have not modified the tiles. If
 you have modified some of the tiles, replace "YOURNAME" by your name.
 
     Part of (or All) the graphic tiles used in this program is the public
     domain roguelike tileset "RLTiles".
     Some of the tiles have been modified by Raz.
     
     You can find the original tileset at:
     http://rltiles.sf.net

The list of contributors to the original RLTiles was:

 Denzi
 =========
 dwarf lord, watchman, watch captain, page, raven,
 *About half of the Dungeon Crawl tiles*
 *Allmost all the player tiles*
 
 Alex Korol
 =========
 dc/abomination*.bmp, 64x64 stairs tile, 64x64 swamp dragon
 
 Edger
 =========
 Cerberus
 
 Wan-ichi
 =========
 werejackal, werewolf, leocrotta, wumpus,
 titanothere, baluchitherium, wererat
 
 So-Miya
 =========
 chickatrice, pyrolisk, vampire, vampire mage
 storm giant, silver dragon scale mail, shimmering dragon scale mail
 silver dragon scales, shimmering dragon scales, baby shimmering dragon
 shimmering dragon, baby silver dragon, silver dragon
 master mind flayer, leather cloak, magcal explosions
 
 Haruko Numata
 =========
 rope golem, leather golem, flesh golem, clay golem
 stone golem, horned devil,
 Lord Carnarvon, Pelias, Shaman Karnov, Hippocrates,
 King Arthur, Arch Priest, Master of Thieves, Norn, Wizard of Balance,
 low boots, iron shoes, high boots, combat boots, jungle boots,
 hiking boots, mud boots
 
 Tatsuya
 =========
 knight(3D), samurai(3D), barbarian(3D)
 hill giant(3D), dragons(3D)
 
 from AllegroHack (Kelly Youngblood, Paul Pliska, John Harris)
 =========
 gas spore, flaming sphere, shocking sphere
 
 Dainokata
 =========
 warg, manes, shrieker,
 water moccasin, elf zombie,human zombie,
 straw golem, iron golem, wererat, shopkeeper,
 guard, iguana, caveman, healer, rogue,
 tourist, dart, aklys, elven bow,
 orcish bow, elven cloak,
 orcish cloak, opera cloak, sack,
 lock pick, lamp, blindfold, towel,
 leash, stethoscope, tinning kit, figurine,
 cram ration, food ration, statue, alter, sink
 
 Zmy
 =========
 dog, large dog, bugbear, rothe, ape, owlbear,
 skeleton, Woodland-elf, Green-elf, Grey-elf,
 Croesus, marilith, vrock, hezrou, nalfeshnee, Orcus,
 Demogorgon, cavewoman, Elwing, dwarvish mattock,
 pickaxe, Kop Lieutenant, Kop Sergeant, elf-lord
 Oracle, Archon, Snake, pyton, cobra, Earendil
