(This file itself is Copyright (C) 2013, 2014, 2015 Alex Smith, and
may be freely redistributed. See license for details.)

NetHack 4 is licensed under the the NetHack General Public License
(see libnethack/dat/license for the license terms). The license is
similar to old versions of the GPL (both the GPL and the NGPL were
based on the same license, the BISON general public license).

Additionally, some of the newer files in the repository offer a choice
of license; they can be distributed under the terms of the NGPL, but
additionally, can also be distributed under the terms of the GNU
General Public License (or GPL), version 2 or later. If a file offers
this choice of license, that fact will be specified in a comment in
the file itself. If you plan to redistribute or modify these
dual-licensed files, you can follow the terms of either or both
licenses, at your option. You can find a copy of version 2 of the GPL
as libnethack/dat/gpl.

The build system, version 3 of aimake, is licensed under version 3 of
the GPL and is *not* licensed under the NGPL. However, the license of
the build system does not transfer onto the files that it is used to
build, leaving the resulting executables as purely NGPL. There is a
copy of version 3 of the GPL inside aimake's source code; it can most
conveniently be viewed via "./aimake --license", or else you can read
it via opening the source code of aimake in a text editor.

libjansson is not part of NetHack 4, although it is compiled into it
during a static build (and used as a shared library during a dynamic
build), and is distributed under the Expat license. (See the
"copyright" file for details.)

The art in the "tilesets/" directories has its own licenses. View the
files themselves, or the "copyright" file, for full details.

For full, machine-readable detail on the licenses of all the source
files that make up NetHack 4, see the "copyright" file.  The licenses
to the files included in a binary distribution (either compiled from
the source, or copied from elsewhere) are listed in the
"binary-copyright.rtf" file.

NetHack 4 DOES NOT COME WITH ANY SORT OF WARRANTY.
