NetHack History file for release 4.3.0-beta3
This file was last updated by Alex Smith, 2017-09-01

Behold, mortal, the origins of NetHack...

Jay Fenlason wrote the original Hack with help from Kenny Woodland,
Mike Thome, and Jon Payne.

Andries Brouwer did a major re-write, transforming Hack into a very
different game, and published (at least) three versions (1.0.1, 1.0.2, and
1.0.3) for UNIX(tm) machines to the Usenet.

Don G. Kneller ported Hack 1.0.3 to Microsoft(tm) C and MS-DOS(tm),
producing PC HACK 1.01e, added support for DEC Rainbow graphics in version
1.03g, and went on to produce at least four more versions (3.0, 3.2, 3.51,
and 3.6).

R. Black ported PC HACK 3.51 to Lattice(tm) C and the Atari 520/1040ST,
producing ST Hack 1.03.

Mike Stephenson merged these various versions back together, incorporating
many of the added features, and produced NetHack version 1.4.  He then
coordinated a cast of thousands in enhancing and debugging NetHack 1.4 and
released NetHack versions 2.2 and 2.3.

Later, Mike coordinated a major rewrite of the game, heading a team which
included Ken Arromdee, Jean-Christophe Collet, Steve Creps, Eric
Hendrickson, Izchak Miller, Eric S. Raymond, John Rupley, Mike Threepoint,
and Janet Walz, to produce NetHack 3.0c.  The same group subsequently
released ten patch- level revisions and updates of 3.0.

NetHack 3.0 was ported to the Atari by Eric R. Smith, to OS/2 by Timo
Hakulinen, and to VMS by David Gentzel.  The three of them and Kevin Darcy
later joined the main development team to produce subsequent revisions of
3.0.

Olaf Seibert ported NetHack 2.3 and 3.0 to the Amiga.  Norm Meluch, Stephen
Spackman and Pierre Martineau designed overlay code for PC NetHack 3.0.
Johnny Lee ported NetHack 3.0 to the Macintosh.  Along with various other
Dungeoneers, they continued to enhance the PC, Macintosh, and Amiga ports
through the later revisions of 3.0.

Headed by Mike Stephenson and coordinated by Izchak Miller and Janet Walz,
the development team which now included Ken Arromdee, David Cohrs,
Jean-Christophe Collet, Kevin Darcy, Matt Day, Timo Hakulinen, Steve
Linhart, Dean Luick, Pat Rankin, Eric Raymond, and Eric Smith undertook a
radical revision of 3.0.  They re-structured the game's design, and
re-wrote major parts of the code.  They added multiple dungeons, a new
display, special individual character quests, a new endgame and many other
new features, and produced NetHack 3.1.

Ken Lorber, Gregg Wonderly and Greg Olson, with help from Richard Addison,
Mike Passaretti, and Olaf Seibert, developed NetHack 3.1 for the Amiga.

Norm Meluch and Kevin Smolkowski, with help from Carl Schelin, Stephen
Spackman, Steve VanDevender, and Paul Winner, ported NetHack 3.1 to the PC.

Jon W{tte and Hao-yang Wang, with help from Ross Brown, Mike Engber, David
Hairston, Michael Hamel, Jonathan Handler, Johnny Lee, Tim Lennan, Rob
Menke, and Andy Swanson developed NetHack 3.1 for the Macintosh, porting it
for MPW.  Building on their development, Barton House added a Think C port.

Timo Hakulinen ported NetHack 3.1 to OS/2.  Eric Smith ported NetHack 3.1
to the Atari.  Pat Rankin, with help from Joshua Delahunty, is responsible
for the VMS version of NetHack 3.1.  Michael Allison ported NetHack 3.1 to
Windows NT.

Dean Luick, with help from David Cohrs, developed NetHack 3.1 for X11.
Warwick Allison wrote a tiled version of NetHack for the Atari; he later
contributed the tiles to the DevTeam and tile support was then added to
other platforms.

The 3.2 development team, comprised of Michael Allison, Ken Arromdee, David
Cohrs, Jessie Collet, Steve Creps, Kevin Darcy, Timo Hakulinen, Steve
Linhart, Dean Luick, Pat Rankin, Eric Smith, Mike Stephenson, Janet Walz,
and Paul Winner, released version 3.2 in April of 1996.

Version 3.2 marked the tenth anniversary of the formation of the
development team.  In a testament to their dedication to the game, all
thirteen members of the original development team remained on the team at
the start of work on that release.  During the interval between the release
of 3.1.3 and 3.2, one of the founding members of the development team,
Dr. Izchak Miller, passed away.  That release of the game was dedicated to
him by the development and porting teams.

Version 3.2 proved to be more stable than previous versions.  Many bugs
were fixed, abuses eliminated, and game features tuned for better game
play.

During the lifespan of NetHack 3.1 and 3.2, several enthusiasts of the game
added their own modifications to the game and made these "variants"
publicly available:

Tom Proudfoot and Yuval Oren created NetHack++, which was quickly renamed
NetHack--.  Working independently, Stephen White wrote NetHack Plus.  Tom
Proudfoot later merged NetHack Plus and his own NetHack-- to produce SLASH.
Larry Stewart-Zerba and Warwick Allison improved the spellcasting system
with the Wizard Patch.  Warwick Allison also ported NetHack to use the Qt
interface.

Warren Cheung combined SLASH with the Wizard Patch to produce Slash'em, and
with the help of Kevin Hugo, added more features.  Kevin later joined the
DevTeam and incorporated the best of these ideas in NetHack 3.3.

The final update to 3.2 was the bug fix release 3.2.3, which was released
simultaneously with 3.3.0 in December 1999 just in time for the Year 2000.

The 3.3 development team, consisting of Michael Allison, Ken Arromdee,
David Cohrs, Jessie Collet, Steve Creps, Kevin Darcy, Timo Hakulinen, Kevin
Hugo, Steve Linhart, Ken Lorber, Dean Luick, Pat Rankin, Eric Smith, Mike
Stephenson, Janet Walz, and Paul Winner, released 3.3.0 in December 1999
and 3.3.1 in August of 2000.

Version 3.3 offered many firsts. It was the first version to separate race
and profession. The Elf class was removed in preference to an elf race, and
the races of dwarves, gnomes, and orcs made their first appearance in the
game alongside the familiar human race.  Monk and Ranger roles joined
Archeologists, Barbarians, Cavemen, Healers, Knights, Priests, Rogues,
Samurai, Tourists, Valkyries and of course, Wizards.  It was also the first
version to allow you to ride a steed, and was the first version to have a
publicly available web-site listing all the bugs that had been discovered.
Despite that constantly growing bug list, 3.3 proved stable enough to last
for more than a year and a half.


The 3.4 development team initially consisted of Michael Allison, Ken
Arromdee, David Cohrs, Jessie Collet, Kevin Hugo, Ken Lorber, Dean Luick,
Pat Rankin, Mike Stephenson, Janet Walz, and Paul Winner, with Warwick
Allison joining just before the release of NetHack 3.4.0 in March 2002.

As with version 3.3, various people contributed to the game as a whole as
well as supporting ports on the different platforms that NetHack runs on:

Pat Rankin maintained 3.4 for VMS.

Michael Allison maintained NetHack 3.4 for the MS-DOS platform.  Paul
Winner and Yitzhak Sapir provided encouragement.

Dean Luick, Mark Modrall, and Kevin Hugo maintained and enhanced the
Macintosh port of 3.4.

Michael Allison, David Cohrs, Alex Kompel, Dion Nicolaas, and Yitzhak Sapir
maintained and enhanced 3.4 for the Microsoft Windows platform. Alex Kompel
contributed a new graphical interface for the Windows port. Alex Kompel
also contributed a Windows CE port for 3.4.1.

Ron Van Iwaarden maintained 3.4 for OS/2.

Janne Salmijarvi and Teemu Suikki maintained and enhanced the Amiga port of
3.4 after Janne Salmijarvi resurrected it for 3.3.1.

Christian `Marvin' Bressler maintained 3.4 for the Atari after he
resurrected it for 3.3.1.


After several years, no further NetHack releases had come out, but various
forks of NetHack had sprung up in the meantime.  The two leading "variant"
forks were SporkHack by Derek Ray, and UnNetHack by Patric Mueller; also of
note was the public server nethack.alt.org maintained by Pasi Kallinen,
which had many minor patches, and which was popular enough to effectively
establish an official variant of NetHack in its own right.  A large
ecosystem of separate patches also grew up over this time period, to try to
compensate for the lack of official releases.  All these variants freely
shared code and ideas, as the development processes, or at least code
snapshots, were publicly available.

AceHack 3.6.0 was the first AceHack release, skipping a version number to
avoid clashes with official versions of NetHack (as at the rate at which
official releases weren't arriving, it seemed unlikely that there would
ever be a NetHack 3.6.0; even a NetHack 3.5.0 was looking dubious).  Mostly
written by Alex Smith, it made major changes to NetHack's interface, in an
attempt to make it more usable, as well as minor changes to other parts of
the game.  Many of the changes came from UnNetHack in particular, which had
similar interface goals (although a different approach to difficulty and
balance).

Later, Daniel Thaler wrote his own fork, NitroHack, using lessons learnt
from his previous work on Vulture (a graphical user interface to the
original NetHack, and more recently UnNetHack).  It was a major code
cleanup, making the code more properly abstracted and network-capable, as
well as replacing the interface with a more fully-featured curses-based
one.

It quickly became clear that AceHack and NitroHack had similar goals, and
had implemented different parts of the work first, so it made sense to try
to merge them.  NetHack 4 was the result, a combination of AceHack and
NitroHack.

Of course, development did not stop there.  One notable development was
that the variant GruntHack (by Grunt) resumed active development (although
it has since ceased again); and although its goals are rather different
from NetHack 4's, it also contained a large number of bugfixes, most of
which have been ported over to NetHack 4, helping reduce the number of
issues inherited from 3.4.3.  Another was the creation of DynaHack, by Tung
Nguyen; originally a merge of UnNetHack and NitroHack, it has since taken
on a life of its own, and has become a fruitful source both for taking
changes from UnNetHack, and of bugfixes in and interface improvements to
the NitroHack code on which NetHack 4 is based.

Finally, of course, there are many changes made specifically for NetHack 4;
Alex Smith moved over from AceHack and now contributes mostly to NetHack 4
among the variants, and more recently Sean Hunt has been making major
improvements to NetHack 4 as well.  We would also like to thank all the
playtesters on nethack4.org (especially Zsbán Ambrus, who was responsible
for most of the bug reports before 4.3 went into beta, and Morwen, who did
much of the playtesting in the later 4.3 betas).  And finally, thank you
for playing our game.  We hope you have fun!

			   - - - - - - - - - -

From time to time, some depraved individual out there in netland sends a
particularly intriguing modification to help out with the game.  The Gods
of the Dungeon sometimes make note of the names of the worst of these
miscreants in this, the list of Dungeoneers:

    Adam Aronow               Izchak Miller             Mike Stephenson
    Alex Kompel               J. Ali Harlow             Norm Meluch
    Andreas Dorn              Janet Walz                Olaf Seibert
    Andy Church               Janne Salmijarvi          Pasi Kallinen
    Andy Swanson              Jean-Christophe Collet    Pat Rankin
    Ari Huttunen              Jochen Erwied             Paul Winner
    Barton House              John Kallen               Pierre Martineau
    Benson I. Margulies       John Rupley               Ralf Brown
    Bill Dyer                 John S. Bien              Ray Chason
    Boudewijn Waijers         Johnny Lee                Richard Addison
    Bruce Cox                 Jon W{tte                 Richard Beigel
    Bruce Holloway            Jonathan Handler          Richard P. Hughey
    Bruce Mewborne            Joshua Delahunty          Rob Menke
    Carl Schelin              Keizo Yamamoto            Robin Johnson
    Chris Russo               Ken Arnold                Roderick Schertler
    David Cohrs               Ken Arromdee              Roland McGrath
    David Damerell            Ken Lorber                Ron Van Iwaarden
    David Gentzel             Ken Washikita             Ronnen Miller
    David Hairston            Kevin Darcy               Ross Brown
    Dean Luick                Kevin Hugo                Sascha Wostmann
    Del Lamb                  Kevin Sitze               Scott Bigham
    Deron Meranda             Kevin Smolkowski          Scott R. Turner
    Dion Nicolaas             Kevin Sweet               Stephen Spackman
    Dylan O'Donnell           Lars Huttar               Stephen White
    Eric Backus               Malcolm Ryan              Steve Creps
    Eric Hendrickson          Mark Gooderum             Steve Linhart
    Eric R. Smith             Mark Modrall              Steve VanDevender
    Eric S. Raymond           Marvin Bressler           Teemu Suikki
    Erik Andersen             Matthew Day               Tim Lennan
    Frederick Roeber          Merlyn LeRoy              Timo Hakulinen
    Gil Neiger                Michael Allison           Tom Almy
    Greg Laskin               Michael Feir              Tom West
    Greg Olson                Michael Hamel             Warren Cheung
    Gregg Wonderly            Michael Sokolov           Warwick Allison
    Hao-yang Wang             Mike Engber               Yitzhak Sapir
    Helge Hafting             Mike Gallop
    Irina Rempt-Drijfhout     Mike Passaretti

The NetHack 4 distribution also contains contributions from:

    Alex Korol                J. Ali Harlow             Ray Chason
    Alex Smith                Jafet                     Raz
    Andrew Apted              Jared Minch               Roderick Schertler
    Andrew Rios               Jeroen Demeyer            Russell Harmon
    Brent Dalager             John Harris               Ryan Karl
    Christian Stegen          Jukka Lahtinen            Sam Dennis
    Clive Crous               Kelly Youngblood          Sean Hunt
    Corey Casto               Luke Franceschini         Sgeo
    Dainokata                 Marcin Kościelnicki       Shmuale Mark
    Daniel Thaler             Marco Bonetti             So-Miya
    Denzi                     Mathew Hodson             Stanislav Traykov
    Derek Ray                 Michael Deutschmann       stef70
    Derrick Sund              Mikko Juola               Stephen Demos
    Edger                     Misty De Meo              Tatsuya
    Edoardo Spadolini         Nathan Eady               Tim Visher
    Eric S. Raymond           Nephi                     Trevor Cook
    Fredrik Ljungdahl         Pasi Kallinnen            Tung Nguyen
    GreyKnight                Patric Müller             Vincent Ho
    Grunt                     Paul Pliska               Wan-ichi
    Haruko Numata             Paula Breton              Zmy
    Hojita Discordia          quuxplusone               Zsbán Ambrus
    
FIQHack also contains contributions from:

    Chris_ANG                 Leon Arnott               Vincent Ho
    Khor                      Tony Anastasio
