About this document:
Last modified by Alex Smith, 2016-03-08

Copyright (C) 2013 Alex Smith.

This document is licensed under the NetHack General Public License.  See
libnethack/dat/license for details.


NetHack 4 Changelog
===================

This document describes the changes that have been made in the NetHack 4
series (i.e. that do not exist in NetHack 3.4.3, the last version of the
NetHack 3 series).

Changes are divided into categories:

  * Major gameplay changes.

    This includes anything that noticeably and directly affects a game
    character during normal play.  In the NetHack 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 series,
    these are only intended to exist as the result of bugfixes (many bugs are
    of the form "doing action X is posible but should not be"), to change
    scoring or conducts, in order to adjust for the effects of an improved
    interface, in order to allow the player to avoid using a convoluted
    sequence of actions to do something they could mostly do anyway (e.g. you
    can now interrupt a multi-turn action voluntarily, if it's the sort of
    action that can be interrupted by a monster) or on occasion to remove
    circumstances where the game is unwinnable, or almost so.  If in doubt, we
    erred on the side of making these changes only when it benefits the
    player.  The NetHack 4.4 series will have intentional gameplay changes of
    its own (although still intends to be conservative compared to other
    variants).

  * Gameplay changes in alternative game modes.

    This includes the addition of alternative game modes (such as the
    "permablind" mode added in 4.2), as well as changes in existing game modes
    (such as debug/wizard mode).

  * Minor gameplay changes.

    Frequently, the gameplay will change in minor ways as the result of fixing
    a bug or improving the game internals.  You probably wouldn't notice most
    of these changes unless we listed them, but they're being listed anyway
    for completeness, and to help people determine what is and isn't a bug.

  * Interface improvements.

    Anything listed here is something you could have done anyway in 3.4.3,
    even if it would have been very tedious to do so.  (The classic example is
    that amnesia has basically no effect in 3.4.3, except on spells, because
    you could record all the information separately outside the game.)  Most
    commonly, these changes are about showing extra information to the
    character (that could have been calculated anyway), streamlining the
    controls, or making it harder to perform dangerous actions.

  * Internals improvements.

    You probably won't notice these unless you're developing on the game, or
    like reading source code.  But they're there, and they're making the game
    easier to develop as time goes on.

  * Packaging / build system / platform support.

    Unfortunately, the NetHack 4 team does not have access to as wide a range
    of systems as the NetHack 3 team had, so we cannot support the more
    obscure platforms (unless someone turns up to help us out).  Additionally,
    NetHack 4 uses more processor power and disk space in the name of making
    the code cleaner and thus reducing bugs, so it probably wouldn't run on
    weaker processors anyway.  There is positive news, though, in that the
    game is now much easier to build.

  * Bugfixes against beta versions.

    These are things that we didn't mean to change, and have since been
    changed back.  They're thus unlikely to be of interest to a NetHack 3
    series player, but may interest players who played a beta of NetHack 4.
    (Changes in beta versions that are larger than simple bugfixes will be
    mentioned in the main changelog instead.)

Documentation improvements are not listed here.  Although there are many of
those too, it should be easy to find them via looking in the various `doc/`
subfolders of the NetHack 4 distribution.  Additionally, changes that cancel
each other out (e.g. if a command was deleted and then re-added) are not
necessarily listed here, although they may be mentioned to provide historical
context.

Each change is marked with various tags, to help learn about the history of
the change:

  * Variant tags ((4), (Nitro), (Ace), (Un), (Grunt), (Dyna), (NAO),
    (Slash'EM), (Spork)): there is a large ecosystem of NetHack variants, and
    in many cases, code has been taken more or less directly from one of these
    variants.  The variant listed is an abbreviation for the variant from
    which the code used came originally, and not the variant from which that
    code was ported from, nor the variant that originally came up with the
    idea.  Changes marked with (4) were created specifically for NetHack 4,
    although some of them may have found their way into other variants since.
    "Bilious" is not a variant; it refers to the NetHack Patch Database.
    
    In terms of the route via which code eventually ends up in NetHack 4,
    NetHack 4 was originally created via porting many of the changes from
    AceHack onto NitroHack (which in turn took many changes from AceHack, some
    of which originally came from UnNetHack).  More recently, changes from
    other variants normally make their way into NetHack 4 by way of DynaHack,
    which in turn takes them from UnNetHack, which sometimes takes them from
    SporkHack.  Of course, good ideas from anywhere can be added directly, if
    necessary.

  * Commit tags ((9abcdef), etc.): these can be used to find the change in
    question in the NetHack 4 code repository (which also contains copies of
    the AceHack, NitroHack, DynaHack, and GruntHack repositories).
    Frequently, many commits will be involved in a change, in which case we
    might list all of them, or just give a range, or even just some examples
    (in the cases where there are a huge nuber of chnges addressing the same
    thing).
    
    Sometimes a commit was cherry-picked directly from another variant, rather
    than being ported.  In such cases, the commit number from the original
    variant is listed here, rather than the new number that it gained after
    the cherry-pick (due to the way git works).

  * Vanilla bug numbers ((C343-1), etc.): to track which bugs in vanilla
    NetHack were fixed by changes in NetHack 4.


Major Gameplay Changes
======================

Commands
--------

`>`: It's now possible to enter a pit intentionally using the `>` command. (Un,
C343-12, a8e8089, 827f0fe, cad32dd, dd56886)

`a`: Opening and closing the Castle drawbridge via music now takes time. (Un,
C343-318, 878e409)

`a`: When writing a scroll by its actual type (e.g. `scroll of identify`),
having seen an unidentified but type-named scroll of the same sort
(e.g. `scroll called unknown 1` that is actualy, unbeknownst to the character,
a scroll of identify) no longer guarantess success in writing the
scroll. (Grunt, C343-403, 0aa9c5e)

`C`: The `C` command no longer identifies high priests at range. (Nitro,
SC343-12, be3e353)

`e`: Protection from eaten rings is no longer considered to be divinely
sourced. (4, f66dbaf)

`E`: Wresting a wand via engraving with it now takes time. (Bilious, C343-246,
a93e3bc)

`r`: Spellbooks can now be read even if spell memory is not low (although
doing so still damages the spellbook). (Ace, 7cd834e)

`x`: No longer costs time (in order to avoid the need to toggle the
`pushweapon` option repeatedly in order to set up weapons for two-weapon
fighting as fast as possible). (Ace, 8c894a3)

`Z`: Spells that ask for a position can now target monsters that are visible
via infravision/telepathy, even if you cannot see the target location using
visible light. (Grunt, C341-7, 3df1f97)

Multi-turn commands can now be interrupted voluntarily by the player, if they
would be interrupted by the appearance of a monster, via specifying a maximum
number of turns to perform the command in the same way as a repeat count, or
(if the `animation` option is set to animate interruptible commands) by
pressing a key or clicking on the map. (Engine code from Nitro, 17a9532;
interface code from 4, 41fcf8c, c1d4e5b)

Non-time-consuming commands no longer cause the character to sink further into
lava. (Nitro, f4754b2, 86b2d0c)


Items
-----

Scrolls of destroy armor no longer give permanent boosts to stats
when wearing cursed stat-boosting items. (Ace, C343-30, 90ee9a8)

Jumping boots and potions of oil now automatically ID (upon equipping them and
game start, respectively), in order to avoid a need to test them with `#jump`
or the `a` command. (Ace, 9dc6d96)

Amnesia sources (such as the scroll) no longer causes the character to forget
information that the player could have remembered, or written down.  This
saves the player the tedium of having to draw all the maps out on paper in
case they get amnesia'd.  To compensate, amnesia now drains skill points.
Additionally, it is no longer possible to control which spells are lost to
amnesia via reordering the list, and spells lost to amnesia have their spell
memory reduced to 0, rather than being deleted from the list entirely. (Ace
and 4, ae101af, 639861d, 863ac16)

Scrolls of charging now make the charge/recharge status of their targets
permanently visible (so that you can see that they've been recharged); and
light sources now have a visible charge count. (4, 66ec75d)

Items which are otherwise identical now stack even if one has a known
beatitude and the other doesn't (this is to compensate for side effects of
container beatitude identification). (4, 9156017)

It is now much more difficult to explode a bag of holding; placing a wand of
cancellation or bag of tricks in it will drain the offending item of all
charges (so that it can be inserted safely), whereas nesting bags of holding
will fail outright unless the bags are insulated from each other with at least
two layers of sacks (at which point the nest is assume to be intentional, and
has the usual explosion chances). (4, e4fd0bd)

Sunsword now stops glowing if a monster holding it is killed. (Grunt,
C343-106, 5e430da)


Monsters and Polyforms
----------------------

`e`: Floating eyes are now impossible for the player to hit with melee
attacks, unless the player is protected from gazes. This is because a good
interface would require confirmation to attack them, thus rendering them
almost entirely unthreatening, so something else had to be done in order to
ensure that they remained dangerous; the old and new implementations both
effectively make them impossible to eliminate via melee without gaze
protection, but the new implementation is a lot less typo-sensitive. (Ace,
d83177f)

`G`: Gnomes now have a chance at generating with candles (although unlike in
AceHack, they don't actually use them, in order to avoid inventory clutter);
this is to make it possible to farm candles in order to avoid the game
becoming unwinnable due to a candle shortage. (4, 9dc7a4c)

Monsters are now capable of using their special attacks even if tame; and more
special attacks now work for polymorphed players than before. (Grunt and Ace,
53a8e41, 05587f7, 3df54b4, 239ed8e, 93811e3, eb5c83c, 7c67ab1, 867118c)

Monsters no longer have spoiler knowledge of the player's location.  Rather,
they will only be able to seek out the player if they have some method of
sensing where the player is (sight, sound, following tracks, covetous sense,
aggravate effects, etc.). (4, 879d0c0, 9085088, 65befc1, ab33194,
072da4c..324e041)

Monsters who naturally live on a level (rather than spawning later) now have a
difficulty mostly independent of the player's level (with some exceptions in
the late-game to keep the game balance close to 3.4.3; in the early game
(pre-D:12), the game wil calculate monster difficulty as though the player's
level were 1). (Nitro and 4, 98a3b47, 0ea054c)

Tame monsters will no longer attack nor be attacked when under 1/3 health;
when injured but on more health, they will be more cautious about what they
fight.  They also no longer attack peaceful monsters, unless you anger the
peaceful monster first.  As a safeguard against being caught in crossfire,
tame monsters at below 1/3 health are now almost impossible to hit. (4,
037731d)

Hostile monsters will now attack each other if they dislike each other
naturally (e.g. elves versus orcs); this change was considered acceptable for
NetHack 4 because it fits in with the theme of improved AI and is almost
entirely to the player's benefit. (Un, 4176ec9)

Numerous bugs have been fixed in the monster AI.  One of the more noticeable
fixes is that monsters can now only locate the player via their own senses
(rather than always knowing the player's location and choosing to ignore it
some of the time if the player was invisible); they can do things like
searching squares by attacking them, and follow an invisible player's tracks
(eventually bumping into them), as methods of locating the player, in addition
to remembering minimal information about the player's movements. (4, 163c8e0,
78cd777, 0ac7085, f891d36, b96aa6e, a402438, 7319788, b46203b, 0d583af)

Monsters use an improved and less buggy pathfinding algorithm.  In particular,
they are now willing to temporarily move further from their target in order
that they might move nearer it later, so they don't get stuck on corners as
easily (this is particularly noticeable with pets).  Additionally, they will
no longer try to pick up items through walls. (4, ad00904, 4ff884d, e3a10ce)


Dungeon
-------

Stairways that lead between branches are now a different map entity from
stairways that lead to another level within a branch (and thus look different,
and are described differently on farlook); this is a gameplay change because
there's no longer a need to take them to see where they lead. (Ace, 6929bda)

The Vibrating Square is now classified as a trap (and thus shows up in the
player's memory after finding it, avoiding the need to mark it, and can be
detected via means of trap detection). (4, e219111)

The chest in the Castle that contains the wand of wishing can no longer be
trapped. (4, 8ec73b5)

Sources of noise now scale correctly to the player's level; instead of always
being louder for a higher-level player, they are louder for a higher-level
player who caused the noise intentionally (e.g. ringing a bell), but quieter
for higher-level players who caused the noise unintentionally (e.g. during
combat), and even quieter for Rogues.  Monsters now react to noise by
investigating the source, rather than merely waking up. (4, 2ec0e59)


Options
-------

Autopickup is now much more customizable, adding filters for items based on
things like beatitude or partial matches on the name, and there is also an
option for whether thrown items should automatically be marked for autopickup.
(Bilious and Nitro, 2327b13, a5bc53b, 4a7e22e, 18bab34)


Scoring and Conducts
--------------------

The scoring system has radically changed; the system used in the NetHack 3
series was massively abusable and did not do a good job of measuring progress
through the game (it was pretty much entirely dominated by monster kills).
The NetHack 4 series tracks score in a number of different categories, each
with diminishing returns, ensuring that a high score requires a range of
different score-maximizing activities. (Ace, 40a84c6, 5bfb6e5, 68a29f0)

Some new conducts have been added in order to discourage degenerate behaviour,
and allow players to prove that they haven't engaged in it: Elberethless and
puddingsplitless. (4, 3f0b895)

A new conduct is added to track players who choose not to violate the flavour
of their role and alignment (defined as their alignment record never
decreasing). (4, 6a1af22..ae00c9c)


Alternative Game Mode Changes
=============================

Debug (Wizard) Mode
-------------------

In local play, there is no longer a restriction based on UNIX username or (on
Windows) character name as to who can enter wizard mode. (Nitro, a50250c)

Games created outside wizard mode can no longer be loaded inside
wizard/explore mode in order to gain spoilers about them and then resume the
original, standard game. (Nitro, 856b22a)

Wizard mode teleportation has been split in two, in order to ease testing the
teleportation code itself.  `^T` now does not allow for any sort of
teleportation that would not be allowed in regular play.  In order to teleport
without restrictions in wizard mode, use `^F`. (4, 3cf2f4a, bfdc807, 65a76b3)

Monster creation in wizard mode now only prompts for which type of monster to
create if the `#genesis` command is used explicitly; and the `#genesis`
command now allows a quantity of monster to be specified at the prompt. (4,
d179170)

Two new wizard mode commands are added in order to reduce interference of
monsters: `#levelcide` to destroy all monsters on the level (saving you from
having to wish up a scroll of genocide), and `#togglegen` to stop monsters
generating altogether (so that you don't have to interrupt whatever you were
doing to levelcide). (4, 2a6738b, c4b063c)

A new wizard mode command `#hpset` fully heals the character; alternatively, a
count can be given to precisely set the character's HP to some other
value. (4, ad21853)

In the wizard mode spoilers on `^X`, the current alignment cap and the
player's hunger level are now visible. (Un, 145e145, 6ec5736)

While in wizard mode, confused level teleport on the Planes no longer has a
chance of crashing the game. (Grunt, C343-5, 3df1f97)

Three new commands are added to accompany `#panic` for testing the game's
error recovery routines: `#impossible` causes a nonfatal error (unlike
`#panic` which causes a fatal error), `#desync` corrupts the binary save, and
a new entry on the `!` menu causes the client to segfault (in order to observe
how that affects the rest of the system, such as the server). (4, 7a3978f,
900018f)

A new debug command `#rewind` allows rewinding of save files to earlier
states, perhaps as part of a manual recovery process, or for testing; it
rewinds to the current turn, and is intended for use while replaying a game.
(It can also undo a game over, although it will not move the save file back
into the saves directory; you'll have to do that by hand.) (4, c1d9296)

The `#vision` command now additionally shows which areas are considered by the
game to be lit. (4, 35cdb4f)

The environment variables that could be used to skew the RNG for special room
generation no longer exist (they caused problems with save file
reproducibility). (4, 83dae9b)


New Game Modes
--------------

Some new challenge game modes have been added, controlled by birth options:
`permablind`, an implementation of the Zen conduct, which leaves your
character unable to see all game; and `permahallu`, in which your character
spends the entire game hallucinating. (4 and Bilious, fd61601, ffe5ae5,
8fd78aa)

A new game mode `polyinit` lets you play the whole game polymorphed into a
monster; you select your polyform as a birth option, and you start polymorphed
into that form and with intrinsic unchanging.  Games in this game mode are not
eligible for the high score table. (4, bdb83fb)

It's now possible to play the game in a "set seed" mode.  This tries to, as
far as possible, line up random events between different games played with the
same seed (thus allowing for more meaningful comparisons between players).
You can also look at the seed from the dumplog of a completed game you've
played, allowing you or someone else to replay the game in the same dungeon.
Games in this mode are not eligible for the high score table. (4, 4da1437,
76369ee..eee6901, 60cb577, 8642323, 668e8fa, f7aedc1, 41644bc)


Minor Gameplay Changes
======================

Display
-------

If two objects have the same textual description, they now will also show with
the same tile in tiles view (rather than using different tiles that look
identical by default, an information leak). (Nitro, a535b83)

Unexplored area, dark parts of a room, and known stone are now distinct
objects to the display system, and can display differently (and do display
differently in tiles mode); this makes magic mapping marginally more
informative. (Nitro, Dyna, Un and 4, 2ad693c, e3ee161, f1bcc95)

Inventory displays are now sorted by the type of item.  (This is a minor
gameplay change because it makes it harder to exploit information on the order
of items in bones files.) (Bilious, Nitro, Un and Dyna, 1ae9b87, e274847,
4d26cb4, 1c153d6)

Inventory displays now show the weight of the item they're displaying.
(probably Nitro, 34f1e85 and others).  Some items had their weights adjusted
in order to avoid spoilers from this. (4, 5a6e10f)

Items in shops now have price tags attached, without needing to have to chat
to the shopkeeper or pick them up to get a price quote. (Un, 9d7ef39)

Hallucination now rerolls appearances somewhat less often (once per
time-consuming action for most hallucinated objects, rather than once per
screen refresh). (4, 4c8b7da)


Commands
--------

`>`: The game no longer discloses information about the ground when pressing
`>` when blind and levitating. (Grunt, C343-32, 4feb4aa)

`+`: The player may now assign known spells to any letter, not just swap the
letters of known spells. (4, 6a5eec7)

`a`: Candles can now be placed into candelabra even underwater. (Bilious,
C343-248, 5c6ed21)

`a`: Digging into a pre-existing hole is no longer allowed. (Grunt, C343-78,
cbf4fce)

`a`: Time usage for the `a` command is now more consistent: it takes time if
any actual action happened or if the character tried and failed, no time if
the action was aborted. (Grunt and 4, C343-353, C343-382, dca24d1, b00d3fd)

`a`: Touchstones can now have arbitrary objects rubbed on them even if
identified. (4, C343-124, C343-130, dc752a1)

`a`: You can now use each stethoscope in your inventory for free once per
turn, rather than being able to use one stethoscope total (unless you saved
and restored in between, in which case in 3.4.3 you could use the same
stethoscope as often as you liked). (Nitro and 4, f342510, 18db100)

`a`: Towels can now be used even if wielded. (4, C343-274, 6e19ca0)

`A`: Now allows equipping items into arbitrary slots (e.g. changing your
secondary weapon slot while wielding cursed weapon), in addition to
de-equipping. The timing rules have also changed, because they were entirely
inconsistent in 3.4.3; for many items, `A` will now be one action slower,
because the 3.4.3 version of `A` contained a bug in its timing
calculations. (4, 983bdde)

`C`: If your finger slips while naming an object, the replacement name now
includes `z` as a possible letter for the resulting random typo. (4, C343-364,
a26b2a4)

`d`: Dropping a container on an altar now reveals the beatitude of the items
inside the container, thus saving the player from having to unpack it
manually. (Ace, 4258309)

`d`: Dropping a ring down a sink now formally identifies it (rather than
prompting the player to informally identify it). (Un, 4f0a367)

`^D`: Kicking an empty space now takes time. (Un, C343-298, 92f43f4)

`^D`: Cancelling a kick on a monster now takes no time and makes no noise.
(Grunt, a2ec6da)

`^D`: The effect of kicking a steed no longer depends on which commands you
use for movement (i.e. it responds to travel, and moving one square at a time,
the same way). (4, 6860cd2)

`^D`: Causing a monster to reel via kicking it with kicking boots now
identifies the boots as kicking boots. (4, 243d312..e7c4029)

`e`: Now warns upon dangerous attempts to eat food; warnings for tainted
corpses no longer cost an existing edibility intrinsic. (Ace and 4, 649a6b7,
5e5f135)

`e`: No longer works on artifacts that can't be touched. (Grunt, C343-244,
7ed1784)

`E`: Now formally IDs the type of wand if the engrave attempt produces a
unique message. (Ace, 1e34184)

`E`: Now works with pick-axes. (4, C343-145, a911545)

`^E`: The number of slots remaining (and available for enhancing skills) is
now shown on the skill enhancement menu. (Ace and Dyna, 529b276, a9047bf)

`F`: Can now be used to force attacks upon terrain.  This is mostly only
useful as a shortcut for applying a wielded pick-axe; however, it opens some
new (admittedly, likely useless) possibilities, like whacking a wall with a
sword, which were not previously possible. (Grunt, C343-322, f7ffd31)

`P`, `W`: Now prints a message if you just equipped a cursed set of armour.
(The `A` and `i` commands will also print the message, if used to emulate `P`
or `W`.) (4, c0d5ee2)

`q`, `#pray`: These commands no longer interact with dungeon features while
engulfed. (Grunt, C343-63, 8c03941)

`q`: Now formally IDs the type of potion if the quaff produces a unique
message. (4, 43b7de0)

`r`: Now formally identifies enchant armour scrolls when they are used to
create DSM. (Dyna, c9ffd37)

`s`: Finding a mimic via a search no longer wakes it; this is to enable
players/interfaces to un-bind the `wait` command if they wish to free up keys.
(Ace, 8208917)

`S`: Saving no longer resets the character's movement energy to 12, and thus
no longer loses any bonus actions the character might have that turn nor any
progress towards accumulating bonus actions on future turns. (Nitro, 0cd2e80)

`S`: Saving no longer blocks the ability to resume the following commands
after interruption: `r`. (Nitro, 5c56a81)

`t`: No longer works without hands. (Grunt, C343-243, d07e9cb)

`T`: Has had its timing rules change, because they were inconsistent in 3.4.3;
now takes the same time as the new `A` command would take, which is typically
faster than `T` from 3.4.3 (except when in a slow polyform), but slower than
`A` from 3.4.3. (4, e5262d7)

`^T`: No longer teleports leashed pets adjacent to you if the teleport fails
(e.g. due to being on a no-teleport level) or is cancelled. (4, c3bdbc4)

`z`: Now formally IDs a wand as teleport if you zap yourself under the same
circumstances as if you zap your steed. (4, b7347be)

`^X`: Now shows the total inventory weight, and how close this is to the
nearest point where burden level changes. (Ace, 237951d)

`#force`: Now works with pick-axes. (4, C343-145, a911545)

`#force`: Now charged for if used on an unpaid item. (Grunt, C343-241,
7704a8f)

`#kick`: Now correctly handles kicking beyond the edge of the map. (4,
C343-245, b85d9a3)

`#offer`: If the character should be given a sacrifice gift but no coaligned
artifacts are available, they will now be given an unaligned artifact as a
gift, rather than the game becoming confused and failing to give a gift at
all. (4, C343-358, aa45966)

`#pray`: The invulnerability period (if any) now protects against stinking
clouds. (Grunt, 3f358cc)

`#untrap`: No longer works on monsters you can't reach due to levitation. 
(Grunt, C343-22, 628c7ec)

Interruptible multi-turn commands are now interrupted by the process of
turning to stone. (Un, C343-74, f203351)

Interruptible multi-turn commands are no longer interrupted if an unseen
monster misses the player with a breath or spit attack. (4, 39d6010)


Items
-----

Pearl rings are no longer capable of rusting. (Ace, C343-386, d97abba)

"leather spellbook" has been renamed "leather-bound spellbook", because it
isn't made of leather. (Ace, C343-160, cc182fe)

Silver damage now works correctly while polymorphed, and from silver arrows.
(Un and Ace, C343-2, C343-171, 97b97bb, 805f9ae)

Boulders created via polymorphing statues, or splitting a stack of boulders on
a square, now block line of sight. (Ace and Grunt, C343-88, C343-114, ff8a0c1,
5cde50e, 607b0f5)

Cancelling an item near a shop now correctly checks whether or not the
cancelled item is in the shop. (Nitro, C343-129, 93a1f3e)

Items owned by shops will be automatically identified if they're the only item
in their weight and price range. (Ace, 767aa23, 5a6e10f)

Cursed light sources will be marked as such when they fail to light (affecting
gameplay in a marginal way if they subsequently get cancelled and then
randomly cursed, because the player will know that the random curse hit that
item in particular). (Ace, 5736180)

The Candelabrum of Invocation no longer becomes permanently unusable if you
take it to the Vibrating Square when it has exactly one turn left. (Grunt,
C343-424, efac3c6)

The Candelabrum of Invocation's weight now includes the weight of the attached
candles. (Grunt, bd97343)

Statues and containers will have the correct weight even if generated on
special levels.  (Grunt and 4, C343-36, f2b7b98, 4f69e13)

Beam-type wands that hit a monster no longer affect its corpse. (Grunt,
C343-362, 2a36eed)

Greased projectiles now work the same way for monsters as for players. (Grunt,
C343-47, 661239e)

Magic lamps now cease being magic in bones if the player died as a result of
making a wish from them. (Grunt, C343-95, 3d7a853)

The wish parser now accepts undead monster corpses (e.g. "elf zombie corpse"),
producing a corpse that could have been be produced as the result of killing
that species of undead. (4, 83e49d2)

It's now possible to wish for an item with a specific inventory letter
(e.g. by wishing for "k - a blessed skeleton key").  This is mainly intended
for the eventual creation of a testsuite, but perhaps it will be of use to
people attempting certain bizarre conducts.  (Note that this affects gameplay
in the obscure situation where you wish for a tripe ration with a full
inventory or when fumbling; it'll count as having been in inventory
momentarily to gain the letter, so a pet will consider it to have been dropped
by the player.) (4, 245d8ce)

The Book of the Dead is now immune to lava even if the character holding it
does not have fire resistance. (Grunt, a9267e4, 1b6f60e)

It's no longer possible to stand on lava with the aid of non-fireproof water
walking boots and sufficiently many hitpoints. (Grunt and 4, SC343-3, 919fdb5,
a591080)

Auto-cursing items now treat monsters the same way as players. (Grunt,
C343-91, 69180c4)

The distance that thrown/kicked objects move now correctly respects the
presence/absence of gravity, whether the floor is stone or ice, and whether
the object is greased. (Grunt and 4, C343-27, 87bfcda, 80bd729)

Objects that provide drain resistance (such as Excalibur) are now immune to
drain themselves. (Grunt, C343-442, dc37dab)

Helms of opposite alignment now reset alignment record in the same way that
permaconversion does. (Grunt, C343-343, fbf8859)

Alchemical explosions now create noise. (Grunt, C343-351, 63dbb64)

Lizard corpses no longer slow monsters who eat them due to stunning or
confusion. (4, C343-173, a4f65c4)

Rings can now be charged even if not formally IDed. (4, C343-290, 32dffda)

Shops now correctly charge for unpaid items whose enchantment has changed via
enchantment scrolls or damage. (Grunt, C343-89, 9f00331)

Probing now observes the contents of a box containing Schrödinger's Cat.
(Grunt, C343-263, 7e5bdca)

Bags of holding now round the weight of their contents correctly. (4,
C343-418, cb6a6c9)

Drums of earthquake can no longer create pits inside holes or trapdoors, and
no longer destroy beartraps (they disarm them instead, if they create a pit on
the same square). (4, 277a41f)

Landmines and bear traps now have (nonrandomized, and distinct) unidentified
appearances; this is mostly so that a land mine (the object) and a land mine
(the trap) can be distinguished in config files, but has a very minor effect
on scoring. (4, a76b51e)

Recently created comestibles can no longer be rotten (this feature was meant
to be in 3.4.3, but there's a typo in the relevant code). (Un, ab81299)

Potions of blindness no longer grant blindness immunity when wielded or
carried in the alternate weapon slot. (Dyna, 96fe8fe)

Players who cannot die to cursed or uncursed potions of sickness (due to
poison resistance) now cannot die to blessed potions of sickness either. (4,
SC343-2, c66219b)

Polymorphed equipped items remain equipped, if the new item fits into the same
slot on the body. (4, b7e605c)

Amulets of unchanging can no longer be polymorphed, nor polymorphed into. (4,
b7e605c)

Dipping potions of polymorph into another potion no longer causes them to be
polymorphed (only the other way round). (4, b7e605c)

If a hat or helmet becomes cursed as a result of wearing it, its BCU status
will become known immediately. (4, 8c25729)

Whistles are now identified upon use (because magic and tin whistles produce
different messages). (4, 096007e)

Potions are now identified when thrown by a monster at the character, if this
causes a unique message to be printed and the character was able to see the
potion before it hit. (4, 3071b59)

Items on the D:1 upstairs are no longer autopickedup before the first turn of
the game (in 3.4.3, they would be picked up even with autopickup off!). (4,
3769725)

Randomly generated splint mail on D:1 no longer generates rustproof for
samurai. (4, 820b493)

Rust, corrosion, etc. now work more consistently between different sources of
erosion damage.  (Some specific changes of this are that grease is now more
reliable and the character is able to notice that an item is rustproof when it
resists damage in more situations.) (4, 4e5d57b..454f173, 6dc5d8a, b380af2)

It's now possible to fit a bag of holding under the gap in a door even if it
has items inside (assuming that the character holding it also fits through the
gap). (4, 50c5dbe)

A punishment ball and chain no longer crash when combined with engulfing
and perhaps petrification. (4, C343-59, 65a76b3)

Uncursed potions of monster detection (and other similar monster detection
effects) now have a very short lingering monster detection effect afterwards.
This is to allow players playing with a non-graphical interface and a keyboard
an opportunity to examine the exact species of each detected monster using
farlook (beforehand, you would need to either use details in a graphical
interface, or use the mouse to examine the monsters). (4, b95ba0e)

Magic mapping now maps the background (normally "floor of a room" or
"corridor") behind a trap or remembered object. (4, bf6eeeb)

Once the character learns the true identity (like "mirror") of any item with a
nonrandomized appearance (like "looking glass"), they will then be able to
identify future items like that even if blind. (4, fd34c2a)

If a spellbook is cursed while you're reading it, it now produces a
short-duration helplessness and aborts the spell memorization, rather than
memorizing the spell, then performing around half of the cursed spellbook
routine and potentially leaving the spellbook in an inconsistent state.
(4, 564a5d6)


Monsters and Polyforms
----------------------

`a`: Antholes no longer generate if there are no ants to place in them. (4,
343-163, 02844f7)

`A`: The alignment of angels is now correctly displayed regardless of whether
they are sent by particular gods or not. (Grunt, C343-122, 6f19361)

`A`: Ki-rins and couatls no longer wear armor. (Grunt, C341-18, 3df1f97)

`b`: Gelatinous cubes now die if they attempt to engulf Rider corpses (thus
preventing the player from indirectly destroying the corpse). (Grunt,
SC343-16, 7536ccc) 

`D`: Disintegration attacks from black dragons now affect monster inventory
the same way as player inventory. (4, b060883, cf276aa)

`e`,`y`: Exploding monsters are no longer visible while the effects of the
explosion are calculated (so that, for instance, you will not hallucinate a
random monster in the location where a black light exploded). (Grunt, C343-64,
a143c93)

`e`,`y`: Exploding monsters are now correctly masked by hallucination. (Grunt,
C343-128, f5964d4)

`e`: Spheres are now consistently incapable of picking up items. (4, C343-138,
d2f3edd)

`E`: Air elementals are no longer solid. (4, C343-295, 1dae971)

`E`: Invisible stalkers now count as having a humanoid shape. (Grunt,
C343-159, 1caa11b)

`g`: Gremlins now reset the entire state of protection when stealing
protection, rather than leaving the amount of divine protection different from
the amount of Defence granted by divine protection. (Un, C343-189, 2a3043c)

`H`: Players in giant polyform can no longer pick up boulders into inventory
overflow slots. (Grunt, C343-225, 5338c20)

`m`: Mimics pretending to be doors now react more appropriately to attempts to
lock or unlock them. (Grunt, C343-409, 23a2051)

`m`: If a mimic is somehow lead to the Rogue level, it will now pretend to be an
open doorway rather than a door if placed into a doorway. (4, C343-34, C343-380,
81e5261)

`m`: Mimics will no longer pretend to be items or furniture in impossible
locations (such as a fountain or boulder over a pit). (Grunt, C343-37,
3e94adf)

`m`: A player who is mimicking an object in mimic polyform will stop hiding if
they polymorph into a non-mimic. (4, C343-391, 89eef0f)

`m`: Mimics mimicking objects that block sight (such as boulders and doors) no
longer continue to block sight after being genocided. (Dyna, 2f9436c)

`m`: Several bugs relating to whether or not a player could see a mimic have
been fixed. (4, 6ee7cdd)

`n`,`&`: Demon princes no longer demand bribes from helpless players, and
foocubi and nymphs no longer attempt to seduce or charm them. (Grunt,
C343-137, e41bd77, 6092b66, 3d53054)

`N`: Players in guardian naga form now spit the correct sort of venom. (4,
C343-153, 56eb207)

`t`: Players in trapper polyform are no longer described as hiding on the
ceiling. (Grunt, C342-51, 3df1f97)

`T`: It's no longer possible to see an invisible troll revive (without see
invisible). (Grunt, bdf06c2)

`u`: Unicorns can no longer catch gems while helpless. (Grunt, C343-115,
b977028)

`u`: Unicorns in bones files are now correctly peaceful or hostile based on
the alignment of the new player arriving on the level. (Grunt, C343-66,
0a9a09b)

`w`: The chance of long worms being cut is now based on the type of damage
they take (slashing having more of a chance to cut them), then the shape of
the weapon that attacks them. (4, 8782996)

`w`: Attempting to close a door on a long worm tail when blind no longer
reveals its head. (4, a402438)

`W`: Incorporeal monsters (ghosts and shades) can no longer be slimed. (Grunt,
C343-81, 53922d0)

`@`: Resurrected quest leaders no longer forget their status as quest leaders.
(Grunt, C343-98, 7c72caa)

`@`: Vault guard handling has been reworked to fix many of the outstanding
bugs in it. (Grunt, C343-23, C343-125, C343-127, C343-166, C343-333, C343-432,
C343-433, C343-435, b3dd07d, 7867ff7, 3775d40)

`@`: Nurses now take passive damage when healing players in passively damaging
polyforms. (Grunt, SC343-15, e44e1cc)

`@`: Nurses now consistently treat characters holding nonweapons as being
unarmed. (Un, 6865f90)

`@`: The Oracle of Delphi no longer welcomes characters that she's hostile to.
(4, C343-181, 5113058)

`@`: Prisoners no longer use messages intended for djinn. (4, 896f668)

`&`: When a djinni is pulled out of a lamp or bottle, if it is annoyed at the
character for disturbing it, it now always generates hostile (rather than
sometimes generating peaceful if the character is neutral). (Grunt, c9456af)

`&`: If a graveyard fails to generate a normal demon, it now substitutes
undead, rather than the nonexistent monster #-1 (which would probably crash
the game). (4, 7345322)

Monsters "shrieking in pain" now create noise. (Grunt, C343-65, 3e0ea7b)

Monsters can no longer equip shirts in zero time while wearing armor. (Grunt,
C343-360, 1da4ce4)

Tame monsters can no longer dig on the Rogue level, if they couldn't dig there
when hostile. (Grunt, C343-4, 06d2940)

Monsters can no longer jump over walls to evade kicks, nor teleport to evade
kicks on a no-teleport level. (Grunt, C343-38, C343-73, 0f8cd36)

Passive damage taken by monsters now scales correctly on the number of attacks
they made. (Grunt, C343-80, dbc3584)

Non-randomly-generating monsters no longer randomly generate on special
levels. (Grunt, C343-415, a68925a)

Pets can now ascend even while eating. (Grunt, C343-83, c22e8e1)

Killing a tame pet from inside no longer spouts warning messages. (4,
C343-299, e568e1b)

Monsters, and players in monster polyform, can no longer continue hiding if
the corpse they're hiding under rots away, or if objects on the square are
otherwise destroyed. (Grunt and 4, C343-33, C343-308, 7f16165, 4af2ed0,
0b2fa24)

Polyforms that are incapable of breathing can no longer use brass or woodwind
instruments. (Grunt, SC343-1, 17fd2d5)

Monsters that do not cause physical damage now have their experience gains
calculated correctly. (Grunt, C343-70, 80f94d9)

Steeds and engulfing monsters are now capable of dropping corpses. (Grunt,
C343-107, 6cf9497)

Disintegrating a steed no longer makes it impossible to saddle. (Nitro,
C343-176, 3bf9166)

Monsters that can ooze under doors can also ooze through diagonal gaps.
(Grunt, C343-144, 892c156)

Monsters no longer get stuck in corridors while fleeing. (Dyna, f71440b)

Monsters will no longer attack hiding players with ranged attacks.
(Grunt, C343-377, 81f437f)

The monster clerical "lightning" spell now works consistently with other forms
of lightning with respect to blinding the player. (Grunt, C342-46, 7438364)

Quest leaders will now avoid traps (thus preventing the game becoming
unwinnable due to the Norn stepping on a fire trap and drowning). (4,
efeff64)

Various AI fixes were made to groups of monsters. For small groups, the group
will have a tendency to stay together or at least not split up too much. Also,
monsters stuck in the middle of very large groups of monsters will run only a
minimal AI in order to save on CPU time and save file churn; this should help
reduce the performance impact of pudding farming (and may break some existing
pastescripts for pudding farming). (4, f4015d7)

If a monster's AI determines that two squares are equally good choices, the
monster will randomize between them even when aiming for or away from a
particular square (rather than just when the monster has no target square
set). (4, c0ca805)

The game now consistently handles a player in a monster polyform having
Strength drained below 3 (dying from the resulting damage is now always
considered HP death rather than sometimes being considered ability drain
death). (4, 9cd95f9)


Dungeon
-------

Rolling boulder traps no longer generate on lava. (Un, 39a4599)

Rolling boulder traps now correctly reset for the next victim if they kill the
player's character (and are subsequently loaded from bones). (Grunt, C343-49,
549ba7a)

It's no longer possible to interact with items at the bottom of a pit with
melee-range commands (such as kicking) unless you are in the pit yourself, or
have phasing. (4, C343-16, C343-17, 7d86789)

Fire traps below ice no longer perform their effects twice when triggered
once. (Grunt, C343-42, 5577e8d)

Characters in water or lava now take water/fire damage regardless of whether
or not they move. (Grunt, 6533efe, f8b9d68)

It's no longer possible to create a pit on a drawbridge via using a land mine.
(Grunt, C343-82, 77c8aa0)

Monsters and characters that escape a drawbridge collapse now correctly fall
into the water/lava beneath it, rather than continuing to stand in midair.
(Grunt, C343-266, 687e769)

The moat created by the Invocation now affects monsters immediately, rather
than with a 1-turn delay. (Grunt, cd40b25)

Shopkeepers no longer sometimes forget about pits dug in their shops. (Grunt,
7d66e21)

Lava no longer gives an extra turn of survival if your water walking boots burn
up. (Grunt, a6951c6)

The time in the dungeon (for things like moon phase and werewolf
transformations) is now specified as an offset from UTC (the "timezone" birth
option), rather than using the local time of the server; this both allows
remote players to get moon phases more in line with their local time, and
removes exploits from malicious daylight saving definitions. (4, 236c80b)

The game now correctly tracks whether the player is aware of water and lava
that they can't currently see (thus, for instance, it's no longer possible to
dig down on a fountain while blind, and then have travel automatically avoid
the resulting pools even though you don't know where they are). (4, c627ba3)

Fire traps now sometimes hit weapons instead of armor. (4, d84cd4f)

The character can now enter a level that's entirely full of monsters, via
displacing an existing monster on that level, without crashing the game (from
the NetHack 3 series devteam, 76f55be)

When a monster jumps onto a polymorph trap, being able to see the monster
(e.g. via infravision) is now sufficient to locate the trap. (4, 2a4fe55)

An engraving containing 128 or more copies of `e`/`l`/`b`/`r`/`t`/`h`
(case-insensitive) is no longer considered to never potentially contain the
substring `Elbereth`. (4, d036612)


Character
---------

Removing an amulet of restful sleep no longer removes intrinsic "sleepitis".
(other sources, C343-356, c5e27fb)

Lifesaving upon unpolymorphing from a stoning-resistant form now unwields
cockatrice corpses. (GruntHack and other sources, C343-222, f4be125, 73f6078)

Killing a monster with an unknown rolling boulder trap no longer breaks
pacifist. (Un, 62a8438)

Unconcious characters can no longer see. (Grunt, C343-101, fccd7a4)

Characters in lava can no longer be slimed. (Grunt, C343-232, 6533efe)

Levitation now stacks correctly with flying, and interrupts multi-turn
commands when it ends. (Grunt, e90f457)

Hunger now interrupts multi-turn actions. (Dyna, f80ea2f)

When stoning a monster from the inside, punishment is now handled correctly.
(Grunt, C343-59, a194db1)

Touchstones in starting inventory no longer give a starting proficiency with
slings. (Grunt, C343-355, ccf75ee)

Stacks of daggers or ammo in starting inventory now start quivered. (Dyna,
1d6a7e1, d551790)

Swallowing a cockatrice whole now violates foodless conduct even if the
character dies in the process. (Grunt, C343-134, a65cf62)

Reading the Book of the Dead now breaks illiterate conduct. However, it can be
invoked instead, for the same results as reading it, but without breaking the
conduct; and there is a message letting players know about this so that they
don't break the conduct by mistake. (Bilious, 8fd78aa)

Clairvoyance granted by the Amulet of Yendor is now visible on enlightenment.
(4, 4f08317)

Accuracy bonuses from martial arts / bare-handed skill are now taken into
account (in 3.4.3, there was code to calculate them, but the code for
attacking forgot to call it). (Spork, 757c4d6)

Helplessness sources are now tracked independently (thus, it's no longer the
case that 4 turns of sleep + 20 turns of paralysis = 20 turns of sleep, as in
previous versions of NetHack). (4, 971d4e9, c55c327)

The blindness from stinking clouds now works consistently regardless of the
speed of the character. (4, 2415414)

A character can now have a different name from the player even in server play.
The set of characters allowed in character names has been limited to prevent
path traversal / shell injection vulnerabilities that might otherwise arise as
a side-effect of this change. (Nitro and 4, 2ec5137..91348a9 and others)

Sleeping gas traps can now affect monsters even if they're ridden by a
sleep-resistant player. (4, C343-260, 20805c6)


Messages
--------

Some messages have had typo fixes. (Un, Ace, Grunt, 4 and Dyna, C343-8,
C343-24, C343-45, C343-54, C343-55, C343-57, C343-58, C343-77, C343-90,
C343-104, C343-109, C343-111, C343-116, C343-123, C343-131, C343-136,
C343-155, C343-183, C343-211, C343-235, C343-258, C343-259, C343-345,
C343-379, C343-399, C343-438, 9528d39, f18503d, 63329da, 6069675, 25bd1d0,
b7dafb1, 1ab7536, 660ac1f, adce07d, d35ea64, 09b7802, ed3c54c, 2cce8e1,
0c2f758, e95ea48, 0333ed2, 07fe690, f809ede, e609855, a78bfcf, 02e6a13,
5d40e9f, e785e38, 6ada174, 4c37976, 6140ba9)

The game no longer produces misleading messages when healing an invisible
monster, scaring a mimicking mimic, using a drum of earthquake while trapped,
sitting down after escaping from a pit, failing to light a light source while
blind, attaching a stack of candles to a candelabrum with one free slot left,
teleporting an engulfing monster using a quantum mechanic polyform, being
attacked by a monster with no attacks while praying, farlooking a monster seen
only via astral vision, observing a monster turn invisible via telepathy,
dying in a shop with multiple shopkeepers on the level, chatting to a sleeping
steed, removing levitation while riding a flying steed, pushing a boulder into
a pool while riding, pushing a boulder onto a level teleporter, or using a
pickaxe when standing on water. (Ace, Un, Grunt and 4, C343-7, C343-15,
C343-18, C343-50, C343-56 C343-69, C343-72, C343-152, C343-174, C343-202,
C343-233, d35ea64, 75888c3, 50b8255, a546d6b, 85054d7, 8c6d549, c0fa205,
3e7219f, 065bac4, 73156d5, 0a8ecf8, 7515046, 4ed3165, 71b9a83)

Climbing a ladder no longer produces redundant messages. (Ace, 6f55aca)

The water in the Plane of Water is now correctly described in messages.
(Grunt, C343-26, C343-325, C343-314, 4605b9b, de18364)

You can no longer hear rolling boulder traps while blind and asleep. (Grunt,
C343-41, 7334f64)

Messages now correctly distinguish between "hats" and "helmets". (Grunt,
C343-28, 7f26bd7)

Messages involving mirrors now respect their identification status. (Grunt,
C343-118, 1dfa2e1)

Messages for displacing pets into traps are now printed in the right order.
(Grunt, C343-71, 14e2d7f)

If a monster is wielding a stack of items, messages now correctly describe
them as holding only one of them. (Grunt and 4, C343-40, C343-168, ce36a66,
9628c2c)

The game now always chooses the correct variant of the "You can move again."
message when helplessness ends, rather than sometimes reusing the previous
message. (Grunt and 4, C343-84, 218cc7b, ba8ede8)

Many new hallucinatory messages and "you can't do that" messages were
added. (Un and 4, 4cbb620, bb5f3d0 and others)

Erodeproofing now takes precedence over maximum erosion status when giving
feedback for why an object cannot be eroded. (Grunt, 593c6c7)

Messages for steeds being killed by their riders now allow for the fact that
riders are always aware of their steed. (Grunt, c063835)

When rumour sources want to exercise or abuse wisdom, this is now correctly
tied to the truthfulness/usefulness of the rumour. (4, C343-178, 125b1c9)

The message for a shopkeeper being after your hide now respects polymorphed
forms. (4, 10eb057)

The game now keeps better track of causes of death across turns, preventing
you from being turned to slime by a scroll of genocide, among others. (4,
C343-219, 75e737c, 24ac31b, 21cbbca)

Objects on lava burning up now always have messages printed for them. (4,
a6951c6, 8d7b8d9)

The game no longer prints a misleading message if your ability scores are
capped by a combination of racial maximums and temporary status effects, and
you try to increase them. (4, 2b437b2)

The game (and characters inside the game) will no longer address monsters and
polyforms that are not truly alive (constructs, undead, etc.) as "mortal" (4,
117d59f).


Crash / Memory Corruption Fixes
-------------------------------

Bisecting a long worm on 1hp, or at level 0, no longer crashes the game. (Un,
C343-324, C343-384, ab1d19f, 26199b2)

Throwing a potion at iron bars no longer crashes the game if it subsequently
hits a monster. (Un, C343-100, 44fef77)

The game no longer corrupts memory when destroying the following items while
wielded: cream pie via `a`; candle or potion of oil via burn timeout; figurine
via autotransformation; potion of polymorph via quaffing (and transforming
into something with no hands). (Un and Ace, C343-218, C343-275, C343-276,
C343-398, 0fcbbbf, 71cf898)

The game no longer corrupts memory when potions of acid are destroyed in
water. (Un, C343-179, 319b504)

The game now correctly tracks items when dying in a shop while two-weaponing.
(Un, C343-270, 0114692)

The game no longer corrupts memory upon probing a reanimated statue. (Un,
C343-94, SC343-8, c6bf9dd)

The game no longer corrupts memory upon attempting to travel from (or maybe
to?) a location equidistant from a very large number of boulders. (Ace,
ceec202)

Bullwhips no longer corrupt memory when applied off the edge of the map.
(Grunt, C343-383, 7831df3)

The game no longer crashes when an engulfing monster expels a player onto a
magic trap and is one of multiple monsters that gets tamed as a result.
(Grunt, C343-147, 04d133a)

The game no longer crashes upon repeatedly giving an unidentified item very
long names using the `C` commands, and/or dipping such an item. (Un, 2eddb58,
ab27767)

The game no longer spews warnings upon angering one shopkeeper while holding
items belonging to another. (Dyna, d995ed1)

The game no longer crashes if the character is teleported onto a sink while
equipping boots of levitation. (4, 59c8439)


Interface Improvements
======================

It should be noted that the interface was entirely rewritten for NitroHack,
and thus NetHack 4.  Thus, there are a large number of minor interface
differences not listed here due to differences in replicating the original
behaviour in the reimplementation.  The NetHack 4 developers have aimed to
keep it keystroke-compatible while in-game, though, except in the cases listed
here.


Commands
--------

`!`: The `!` command for starting a shell no longer exists; pressing it by mistake
was much more common than using it for an actual shell, and the `^Z` suspend
command (which was removed by NitroHack but re-added in NetHack 4) is probably
more useful. (Nitro and 4, c2316d2, 10645f3)

`!`: The `!` command now shows a menu that contains commands that are
generally applicable regardless of the character's situation (such as changing
options, viewing character statistics, and saving the game); the commands each
have their own individual bindings too, but the combined menu may be easier
for some players to remember. (4, e73128a)

`_`: Travel now understands that the player might want to route through traps; it
will still try to avoid traps, but if avoiding a trap is impossible or would
require going a long way out of the way, it will route to just before the trap
and then wait for more input. (Ace, 18888d8)

`_`: Travel is now interrupted by hostile monsters capable of attacking, even
if not adjacent.  (The `travel_interrupt` option controls this behaviour, and
can be turned off to require monsters to be adjacent before interrupting
travel.) It is also now interrupted by confusion. (Ace and Dyna, f52e890,
7dc7ea3, a7f6b94)

`_`: Travel now treats boulders in Sokoban the same way that it treats walls,
making it much safer to use. (Dyna, 4b57d83)

`_`: Travel no longer gets stuck in infinite loops in some corner cases
involving unreachable spaces and obstacles that block sight. (Dyna, 02da53e)

`_`: Travel is no longer stopped by engravings that the player has seen
before. (Dyna, 2d5d701)

`_`: Travel (and farmove and autoexplore) now respect the `movecommand`
option, meaning (among other things) that they will displace pets if normal
movement would. (4, 6860cd2)

`:`: Has been split into two commands: `:` (lists what is here without feeling
the square, equivalent to the old `:` when sighted), and `^G` (feels the
ground, costing a turn and touching items on it, equivalent to the old `:`
when blind). (4, 955a4e7, f394be6, 1c76f8f)

`;`: Now shows a quick description of map cells as the cursor is moved over
them, so that there's no need to select a number of cells you want to identify
individually. (4, d90a5a1)

`;`: Now understands the difference between `.`/`,`/`:`/`;` confirmations,
just as `/` does. (4, 5edb710)

`/`: Now contains a database of item descriptions, rather than flavour text.
(4, b9afc36)

`+`: Now lists how much memory of spells remains (something that previously
could have been tracked by hand). (Ace, 3bb41b3)

`>`: No longer automatically digs downwards unless the `autodigdown` option is
set. (Dyna, 4bf0151)

`a`: No longer breaks wands; that was moved to `V`, in order to reduce the
chance of typos. (Ace and 4, 120cdac, 5a49ff0)

`a`: `a,` is now accepted as a synonym for `#loot`. (Ace, 6b75b3c)

`a`: Now respects the `movecommand` (formerly `confirm`) option when pounding
monsters with a polearm. (Grunt, C343-305, dca24d1)

`a`: Now accepts a count, allowing in particular lighting some of a stack of
candles. (4, c0a22a4)

`^A`: Now actually works. It remembers arguments to a command in order to be
able to repeat them; and can also now be used to resume an interrupted
multi-turn action. (4, 017ca27, 828dbbb)

`C`: `#name` and `C` (in addition to some new commands, such as `#annotate`) have
been merged into a single menu, bound to `C` by default; the original commands
exist with no bindings, so that it is possible to restore the NetHack 3
behaviour via rebinding keys. (NAO, Nitro and 4, c1e315a, fe36496, 9c7596c)

`C`: Items with randomized appearances can now be type-named even if you don't
have a copy of the item handy to type-name (thus saving you from having to
remember until another item with the same appearance finds its way to your
inventory); because of this, randomized-appearance items no longer prompt for
names when destroyed (rather, there is a shortcut in the `C` menu to name the
most recently destroyed randomized-appearance item). (Ace, 9562e5c)

`^C`: Now a synonym for `!` (open menu), but one which works even at prompts
(thus allowing you to save via opening the menu at a prompt, and then choosing
to save from the menu).  Note that only a limited range of functionality is
available from the menu while at a prompt. (4, 5b6b996)

`D`: Now allows selection of all unidentified items. (Nitro, a854a21)

`e`: Eating from the ground now works like Slash'EM, using `e,` (and a menu if
there's more than one item) rather than `ey` to eat items on the ground, and
thus cutting down on food-related typos. (Ace, Dyna and 4, 28b83ea, abba6bc,
1cadf2d)

`^E`: A new shortcut for writing "Elbereth" on the floor using your fingers
(nothing that couldn't have been done with the `E` command, but it's faster to
type). (4, 24e0071)

`f`: When firing with an empty quiver, you can choose an item to quiver and
the item will be both fired, and quivered for future firings. (Bilious and
Dyna, 1115668, c489412)

`g`,`G`,`5`: The difference between these commands (whether they stop at
intersections) is now controlled via the `corridorbranch` option, not which
command you use, and the three are now identical (freeing up any of them to be
rebound, should you need more keys for whatever reason). (4, b3a276f..9ca21c3
and others)

`^G`: The old `^G` (debug mode create monster) was moved to `#genesis`; `^G`
now feels the ground for items. (4, f394be6, 1c76f8f)

`h`, etc.: Walking into a closed door is now interpreted as an attempt to open
it. (Ace, cea2284)

`h`, etc.: Walking into an always-peaceful monster will chat to them rather
than attacking them, unless an `F` prefix is given. (Ace, 361ed66)

`h`, etc.: What these commands do is now controllable via the `movecommand`
option, which offers a range of possibilities, such as the `standard`
behaviour, and a `pacifist` setting that never attacks.  This replaces the
`confirm` option (`confirm` off corresponds to a `movecommand` of
`indiscriminate`), and the `safe_pet` option (`safe_pet` off corresponds to a
`movecommand` of `traditional`), and has many other possibilities. (4,
6860cd2)

`H`, etc.: Shift-moving down a path that eventually collides with a monster no
longer automatically attacks it. (4, 4fd86a5)

`i`: Selecting an object from the inventory menu `i` now produces a menu of all
commands that work with that object. (Ace, Un, Nitro and Dyna, 59363d1,
7f91acf, 5490bef, 95ce923 and others)

`^I`: You can now split a stack of items in inventory via entering the number
of items you wish to split out of the stack between the `^I` or `#adjust` and
the inventory letter for the stack. (Bilious and Nitro, 7092675)

`m`: The `m` command is now the only way to start entering water/lava (unless
levitating, or confused/stunned/otherwise unaware of the danger), in order to
cut down on typo-related item destruction and death. (Ace, eadc0ef)

`n`/`0`-`9`: It's now possible to rebind the prefix for giving a numeric count
to a command.  If you bind the main keyboard digits to be a repeat count (as
is the default), you get behaviour like "vi-keys" from the NetHack 3 series,
whereby you can enter a repeat count directly.  Any other key just enters
repeat count mode without specifying a count, like `n` from "numpad" mode from
the NetHack 3 series. (a199737)

`o`: Now closes doors in addition to opening them, and unlocks locked doors
(using whichever unlocking tool you used most recently). (Ace, 03643af,
6ee1f33)

`^O`: The game now automatically tracks notes on interesting dungeon features
that the character has seen on levels they have visited, via a new command
`^O`/`#overview`; additionally, a character can select a level from this menu
to view their memory of it, and name levels using the `#annotate` or `Cf`
commands. (Bilious, Un, Dyna, Nitro and 4, a155515, c461257, 5083a8e, 05472d5,
3e4a189, b015a4c, a765dbf, 8fb4e51, and others)

`p`: The `p` command can now be cancelled without having to say "no" to each item
individually. (Ace, 962456a)

`P`,`R`,`T`,`W`: The `W`/`P` commands have been merged, as have the `T`/`R`
commands. By default, the two keybindings for each of the merged commands are
entirely interchangeable, but this frees up keys so that you could rebind them
to something else if you wanted to. (4, 24c4359)

`P`,`R`,`T`,`W`: Can now equip and unequip items in slots blocked by other
items; the outside slots will be temporarily removed to allow for the
multistage equip (and left removed if they cannot be re-equipped afterwards,
e.g. when wearing a shield with a two-handed weapon previously wielded). (4,
e5262d7, ec32a78)

`q`: Quaffing from sinks and fountains is now on `q,` rather than 3.4.3's `qy`
(which broke muscle memory when attempting to quaff from inventory slot `y`).
(Ace, a113165)

`r`: A scroll of charging you just used no longer appears in the list of
objects that could potentially be charged. (4, C343-161, ef93676)

`R`,`T`: The `T`/`R` commands will prompt for an object even if there is only
one possibility, so that objects will not be removed due to typos. (Nitro,
723776d)

`S`: The `S` command now also allows quitting the game, `S!y` (chosen to be
hard to type, and thus unlikely to be typed by mistake). (Ace, a07c105,
0b37bc4)

`^T`: Cancelling a controlled `^T` command with Escape no longer costs a
turn. (Dyna, 5f60575)

`v`: The game now has an "autoexplore" command, bound to `v` by default, that
automatically explores until it finds something interesting or is interrupted
(by a monster, trap, or similar effect). (Ace, Un and Dyna, 5f2e241..d1d221d,
a06d1c8, 34df1f3, 02c4698..3479754, 579d288..3237483, d117d1f, 2f85168,
dffe879, 6bf8e3d)

`V`: Now also allows you to rub items, if they're suitable for rubbing rather
than invoking, and is the new way to break wands. (4, 120cdac)

`w`,`a`: When the `multistage_equip` optionis set, these commands will
automatically remove a shield to make way for a two-handed item. (4, ec32a78)

`X`: The `X` command for entering explore mode no longer exists; `X` is now
bound to `#twoweapon`. (Nitro and Ace, a2c8999, 74dea97)

`X`: When attempting to enter two-weapon mode with an invalid character, the
game explains what is wrong. (Un and 4, 21bc711, bdd6251, fd16f77)

`^X`: The `^X` command now records a range of information (such as which
intrinsics the character has gained, or what monsters the character has
killed) that could have been (and often was) tracked manually by the player
using out-of-game notes. (Ace, e894514..a7a0ce7, cd9df40)

`Z`: Directional and positional spells can now be cancelled at the prompt that
requests a direction or position. (4, e75e808..00cb03c)

`#`: Extended commands are now case-insensitive. (4, c6d4f71)

`#history`: The game now stores a list of major events that happened during
the game (levelling up, wishes, etc.), viewable in-game with the `#history`
command, and in the dumplog. (Nitro, b905a92)

`#loot`: No longer asks you whether or not to loot the only container on the
current map square; if there are multiple containers, a menu will be
used. (Un and Dyna, f033f23, e3c7db5)

`#offer`: Now uses `,` to sacrifice corpses on the floor, analagously to the
`e,` change for eating. (4, fda3342, 322aa79)

`#wipe`: Now mentioned by the game when it becomes useful. (Dyna, 39e2c13)

Many commands have gained additional bindings, and in a few cases lost some:

  * `#adjust`: now also available via `^I`
  * `#chat`: now also available via `c`
  * `close`: now on `o` (although `c` normally works, for compatibility)
  * `#enhance`: now also available via `^E`
  * `#invoke`: now also available via `V`
  * `#monster`: now also available via `M` (farmove is on `g` and Num 5)
  * `#offer`: now can also be spelled `#sacrifice`
  * `#pray`: now also available via `^W` outside wizard mode
  * `#quit`: no longer implemented, use `S!` instead
  * `#ride`: now also available on `M-r`
  * `#rub`: merged into `V`
  * `#twoweapon`: now also available via `X`
  * `version`, `verhistory`: moved onto the help menu `?`

(4, 66d44c8, 79619b6, 2de7cf1, eb717fd, 2ee0dcb)

The code now always uses a menu upon pressing `?` at an object prompt, rather
than using the message area when there's exactly one possibility. (Nitro,
50e5cba)

It is possible to use the `m`/`M` keys to cycle between monsters when asked
for a position. (Nitro and Dyna, c9737d1, b63723b)

All commands are now rebindable; they can be rebound via the keymap menu
in-game (a submenu of the options menu), and these changes will be saved for
future gameplay sessions. (Nitro, 411a005, dbf6cbe and others)

It is now possible to customize which commands exist as extended commands
(thus, it is possible to have a command with no binding, or an extended
command that also binds to a key, such as `#monster`/`M`). (Nitro, 0403969)


Items
-----

Stormbringer no longer automatically confirms attacks on monsters. (4,
d2b6039)

Named items no longer stack with un-named items, in order to make it easier to
prevent items stacking. (4, 0df7237)

Extinguishing a candle now adds it back to an existing stack of candles, if
appropriate, in order to make candle use less annoying (if you need to prevent
this happening, you can name the candle). (4, 0df7237)

Genocide prompts (e.g. from the scroll) now parse `master mindflayer` as
`master mind flayer`, not as `master`. (Un and 4, C343-395, a41a65d, 8d086e4)

Boulders now render as `0` by default. (4, 5d5b740)

Thrown projectiles automatically requiver even if the quiver empties entirely,
so long as they're autopickedup by means of the `pickup_thrown` option. (Dyna,
3b5634b, 234d32f)

Lit objects are now treated like equipped objects for the purpose of
highlighting equipped objects in inventory menus. (Dyna, b999769)

To help prevent typos, inventory letter assignment now tends to steer food items
away from the letters eyYnN; potions away from qyYnN; scrolls from r; wands from
z; and armor, gems, rocks, balls, and chains toward these problem letters. (4,
894d615)

Walking over items now never produces a pop-up box describing them; rather,
they appear in the inventory sidebar (if using a wide terminal), and a message
appears ("There are a few items here", etc.) to alert the user that there are
items there (perhaps propmting the user to view them using `:`). (Ace, 44f4c51)


Options
-------

Options are now stored in the appropriate user configuration directory for the
system, and separately for the engine and each windowport (for instance,
`~/.config/NetHack4/{NetHack,curses}.conf` on Linux); they are written
automatically by the game whenever the options are changed with no game
loaded, rather than needing to be edited by hand. (Nitro and 4, 679b28f,
deb573e..0a7fa1e, 0b6c90b..ccc0472, 8233832 and others)

Many options that previously had to be changed at compile time can now be
changed at runtime (but are fixed for a given game once it has been started,
i.e. are "birth options"): `ELBERETH`, `REINCARNATION`, `SEDUCE`. (Nitro,
b84594b, bd7f641, ad88da7)

Some options (that were basically unused, that do nothing on modern systems,
or were made redundant due to other changes) were removed: `traditional`,
`perm_invent` (now automatically determined from terminal width),
`sanity_check`, `timed_delay`, `travel` (redundant to keybinding),
`pickup_types` (redundant to the new autopickup system), `help`, `fixinv`,
`lootabc`, `toptenwin`, `ignintr` (now always false in wizard mode, true in
regular play). (Nitro, 96f7c20, 3a0d9d8, 24604f9, 920cbef, bf652c4, 0453e07,
8109b2a, 7807fab, b63c1b1)

It is now possible to disable the loading of bones files for a game, using a
birth option `bones`. (Nitro, 4bbff89)

It is now possible to increase the length of the control-P list to much higher 
values than in the NetHack 3 series. (Nitro, 88716d3)

A new option `show_uncursed` can be used to suppress the hiding of "uncursed"
in situations where it's implied via knowing an item's enchantment or being a
Priestess or Priest. (Bilious, 44ca3f6)

A new option `comment` has been added that does nothing.  Its purpose is to
allow a player to prove they own a server account (via setting the value of
the option to a specific string), for tournament administration. (4, 4972873)


Display
-------

The character now remembers one of each of an item, monster, trap, etc. on a
map square, rather than being limited to only remembering one of those total
per map square. (Slash'EM and Nitro, fee7233, c3381e3)

The status area has been redesigned, allowing either a 3-line status area with
full information shown, or a compact 2-line status area that omits some
lesser-used information, giving room for HP and Pw bars (that also change
color as they get lower). (Nitro and Ace, cd19816 and a13501c)

When using a large terminal, the border of the screen will change color to
warn of low health and particularly pressing status effects. (4, 6c0a9a3)

The character's AC is now shown as a "Defence" value, that counts up from 0,
rather than down from 10; there are currently no changes to the AC formula, it
merely displays differently. (4, 25161ad)

The status area now lists many more statuses than before, such as
"Levitating", and colors them appropriately. (Ace and 4, fd746b7, f9402ec,
7265bb2, aea03d3, e461dea..c844f34, b7df68f)

Instead of ASCII/IBMgraphics/DECgraphics/tiles, you specify the renderings you
want for various map elements using a tileset (which could be either graphical
or text-based); the game translates this to Unicode graphics, IBMgraphics, or
image rendering accoring to what your interface needs.  (Graphical tiles re
only currently available if using the SDL backend to libuncursed).  You can
use the `tilecompile` tool to create your own tilesets, either text-based or
image-based.  (Nitro and 4, 2fd08d1, 14a028a, b1f8a8c, 2f4f50a, 6dd19de,
524a57f, and many many others; I lost track of them)

On sufficiently wide terminals (or sufficienly wide windows, in tiles play), a
sidebar will be used to show the player's inventory and information on the
current map square.  (This replaces the "perm_invent" option, that used not to
work in tty play anyway.) (Nitro, 39db83c, 171ff59)

On very very large terminals (large enough that the map, status area and
message area have all expanded to full size), any remaining space is used to
show hints about the game controls, and information about the map square under
the mouse cursor (if the `mouse` option is on). (4, 918eec3, 7cb7397..b604352,
cf03b19..4a08a7e, c4c2b2e..d20d64d, 646f9f1)

The game now understands "dark gray"/"black" as an additional color to the 14
already available (although only 7 of them were typically used); now, all 16
available colors are used by the game for rendering. (Bilious, Nitro and 4,
ef6581f, 9291a95)

The terminal / game window can now be resized during the game; so long as the
new size is at least 80 by 24, this will not break rendering. (Nitro and 4,
a00086e, 72963ea, 625ba90, 77a94cc, 6b7506b)

A new `animation` option (replacing `runmode`) allows control of the speed at
which all interruptible multi-turn actions play, not just running.  For
instance, when turned on, multi-turn search actions animate (with the turn
counter increasing and monsters moving around being visible on the map).  This
is so that they can be interrupted.  The duration of actions is
log-compressed, as with most replay tools for NetHack games, to avoid long
waiting periods where apparently nothing is happening apart from the turn
counter increasing. (4, c1d4e5b, 011f9a2)

Many monsters (and the occasional dungeon feature) have been assigned new
colors in order to make them more distinct; some monsters have also been
assigned underlining to make them even more distinct, and ghosts and shades
have been moved to the `W` monster class in order to make them visible. (Ace
and 4, 2d6ee5a, ab96b14, 9681301, d6f6f20)

The message area now shows more than one line, on a sufficiently large
terminal.  The extra space is used to show extra messages from this turn, in
order to cut down on `--More--` prompts (which are still presented if there
are so many messages generated in a turn that they do not fit into the message
area); if space still remains, it shows messages from previous turns, in a
darker color (dark gray or blue). (4, deefc21, 4fa8192, 6825a36, 3a464dd,
fc11b9d..abc1efc)

The message area (and `^P`) now show which selections were made at prompts,
menus, etc.. (4 and Dyna, 58295ae, 7ea9a49)

The game now tracks the player's knowledge about whether doors are locked,
unlocked, and/or trapped; in console play, this is accomplished via via
coloring the doors (as red, green, cyan respectively), and there is a similar
indicator in tiles. (Ace, 599c3d1)

In console play, background colors are now used to show information about the
game: red = "there are stairs on this square" (including under items); brown =
"this monster is peaceful"; blue = "this monster is tame"; magenta = "this
monster is detected"; cyan = "this square is trapped".  Similar information is
available in tiles play, via the use of overlays on the tiles.  This is
controlled by the `bgbranding`, `hilite_pet`, and `use_inverse` options. (4,
b30c90a, a919baf)

Map squares that the player has stepped on are now drawn differently in order
to communicate this fact (controllable via the `floorcolor` option). (4,
a146d59, 5da195e)

Menus are now drawn on a screen location that aims to avoid hiding important
information; for instance, the inventory menu is drawn over the inventory
sidebar (if there is one), so that it does not hide the map or messages.  (4,
69841a7, 4e77ee8)

Walls and floors now have a huge range of different colour schemes (depending
on the selected tileset or the ASCII equivalent), depending on which branch
you're in, and sometimes, where in the branch you are. (4, b58c431)


Outside the Game
----------------

The game no longer exits when a game is saved or ended, allowing another game
to be started or loaded. (Nitro, 3616a4c, 39db83c and others)

The death reason now records more specific information on what caused
helplessness than just "while helpless". (Bilious, 7ccecee)

The game now automatically records a dumplog showing information about the
game when the player ends. (Nitro, Dyna and 4, 28c01f1, 3ddd389, 5dc4448,
653784f, 00fa98f, 97fd16d)

Extinct creatures are now listed in the end-game dumps, in addition to
genocided creatures. (Bilious, 594f040)

Death messages are now more precise, hopefully making unique deaths
competitions more interesting; for instance, deaths such as "touching a
cockatrice corpse" have been made more specific (e.g. "searching a monster's
interior for a cockatrice corpse").  Additionally, portions of the death
message under user control have been marked to avoid tournament parser
exploits (e.g. "killed by kicking a "slime mold (with the Amulet)""). (Grunt
and 4, 0128f35, e6b2994, caac7d0, c278fd2)

The game now generates an extended logfile that stores more detail about what
happened in the games played on that installation (or server), for statistical
and tournament scoring purposes. (Bilious, Ace and 4, 33350a2,
e25fe11..b405854 and others)

Pressing `q` during the "Do you want your possessions identified?" sequence
now skips to the final screen with the tombstone, rather than skipping past
it, avoiding the need to repeatedly press `n` to get to the tombstone. (4,
5925b5c)

There have been grammar improvements to death messages caused by choking on
artifacts. (Grunt, 1f9636f, ef35a26)

Self-genocide while polymorphed no longer creates a corrupted tombstone. (4,
C342-16, c3bdbc4)

The game executable can now connect to the Internet to receive NetHack-related
announcements and (when there are no announcements available) gameplay tips.
This feature will not be activated without the user's permission (it asks on
the first load); even after the first load, you can control it via the
`networkmotd` option. (4, b0786a7, 367915e)

Failures to open a file are now logged in the paniclog, making problems like
missing dumplogs easier to diagnose. (4, cc037f1)

There is now a warning upon attempting to start a non-scoring game (to avoid
accidents where, say, your settings are accidentally left in debug mode or set
seed mode, and you try to play what you think will be a scoring-eligible
game). (4, a495b49)


Internals Improvements
======================

Coding Style
------------

Many macros have been removed, substituted into the source code (where this
makes the code easier to read), or replaced with functions. (Nitro, 9bd8a54
and others)

Most conditionally compiled features have been removed from the game source,
in the favour of always or never compiling them; this ensures that nobody is
missing features in their game.  (This does not affect gameplay, because the
features that had gameplay effects were made into runtime-changeable options
instead; see other changes.) (Nitro, c9663db and others)

The code now uses C89-style prototypes rather than K&R-style function
definitions. (Nitro, 41fe692..6daeaee)

Many fixes to compiler warnings. (Nitro and 4, 918c516..91ab7bc, 13cf183 and
others)

The coding style was made more consistent. (Nitro, a73c088, d8dbbfe)

The indentation and whitespace were made consistent across all files;
previously, the code used a mix of 4-space indents, 1-tab indents, and
4-spaces-for-1-indent-1-tab-for-2-indents styles, now everything uses 4-space
indents and a consistent set of rules for things like which lines to put
braces on. (4, 4daa09e, 656fd82, d540858)

Dead (or mostly dead) code, constants, and variables (especially global
variables) were removed. (Nitro and 4, 487ec18, b056309, 3160d45, 03367af,
088afe6 and others)

Many variables have been marked as `const`. (Nitro and 4, 3916bcf, 072167e and
others)

The code is now almost entirely const-correct (a few exceptions still
remain). (4, 0c75ca2, e622855)

The code now uses standard C functions in place of their pre-standard
equivalents. (Nitro, 1b49dfb, 0f2b938)

`pline` is now used directly to output messages, rather than using functions
like `You` and `The` for outputting strings that start with specific words and
`pline` only in the general case. (Nitro, 6d548b7)

Instead of using static buffers to store strings, the vast majority of buffers
are now dynamically allocated and have no length limit. (4, 0c75ca2, 6e90958)

All functions are now explicitly marked `static` or `extern`. (Nitro, 476bc4a)

The code now makes use of C99 and C11 features where they greatly simplify the
code, or are more portable than the alternatives, so long as the compilers
that we use in practice (gcc and clang) support them as extensions even
outside C99 mode. (4, 9e13e1b, 1362014)

The code now makes more use of functions/macros for handling common code,
rather than duplicating it. (Un and 4, 7158a54, a7f6a59 and others)

Header files no longer have dependencies that force them to be included in a
specific order. (4, 122bc10)


Data Storage
------------

Many data that are logically associated with a level (e.g. long worm
information, engravings, light sources) are now stored inside the structure
for that level, rather than separately. (Nitro, b78bb49, 5c2867a, 3fa2644)

Gold is now treated as an object, not a number. (Nitro and 4, 52665f1,
2894d39, 15013a8, 4a162c2)

The game no longer saves inactive levels to disk in files of their own; the
binary saves hold all levels at once, and inactive levels are also stored in
memory. (Nitro, 085908d)

A large number of global/static variables have been replaced via storage in a
few globals that each have defined semantics for their lifetimes, with
function parameters / return values, or with constants. (Nitro and 4, b854b71,
f342510, d0ecdb0, cb9ed91, 1362ccd, ba8ede8 and others)

Saving data and freeing data are now separate concepts internally,
considerably simplifying the code. (Nitro, bf43e08)

Migration of objects now occurs immediately, rather than being deferred until
the player changes level. (Nitro, 4 and Dyna, ed8960f, aad761b, b19bd70,
2557f16 and others)

Equipment is now stored internally via a flag on items to say whether they're
equipped, rather than pointers into the inventory array.  This greatly reduces
the chance for bugs related to forgetting to zero equipment pointers, makes
the code cleaner, and makes it easier to implement equipment-related features
in the future. (4, 4519fce..438f761, dc47863)

Extrinsics are now calculated when needed, rather than being dead-reckoned,
making the extrinsic-handling code much simpler. (4, 730a8f6)

Equipping is now done through a centralized set of functions, in order to
avoid needing special cases everywhere. (4, 7d24609, 0dbb0de)

The storage for properties of a level has been simplified. (4, 95c0482,
f651183)

Light and darkness are now properties of a map square, rather than of a
background; the main practical benefit of this is improved rendering of
unusual dungeon features in unusual lighting conditions. (4, 3c06767, 3b11dc1)

x coordinates and y coordinates now use the same storage internally; in
particular, x = 0 no longer means "off the map", because y = 0 is on the
map. (4, e61bcb3, f12c528, 8f01d76 and others)

Objects intended to exist only briefly are now allocated separately and checks
occur that they do not survive for more than a turn. Additionally, venom now
must be temporary and accordingly cannot be wished for. (4, b4fd8ec, 6a04b22)

Objects are now always stored on an object chain, rather than sometimes just
stored on the stack or the like; this mean that any object-related memory
leaks will be discovered, and that temporary objects can be correctly
deallocated if the game ends while they are allocated (say, due to
hangup). (4, 301962c)

The game is now capable of recovering saves automatically if something goes
wrong; and it does a save and restore almost every turn to ensure that the
save file can still be loaded correctly.  After a save-related error, the user
will have the option of automatic recovery, manual recovery (leaving the save
file in place to be manually edited), or in some cases automatic repair
(automatic recovery works by reloading from a backup save, automatic repair
via treating impossible values as plausible legal values). (4, 41a0806,
7a3978f)

A new random number generator is in use, with improved error handling,
increased seed space, better seeding, better security against attempts to
deduce the RNG sequence, and reduced save file size. (Ace and 4, 7d99f45,
e2e7a1b, 7d719e6)

The monster movement formula uses a different internal representation; instead
of each monster independently keeping track of when its next turn will come
up, the game stores information that allows it to calculate the turn order for
any given turn in advance, together with where it is inside the current turn's
turn order. This makes the save files easier to compress. (4, c5a485a)

Save files now use an encoding in which the turn count is added to or
subtracted from various fields, in order to make the save file more
compressible. (4, 529d8c8..a615e70)


Client/Server Structure and API
-------------------------------

The game engine has been split out into a library of its own, `libnethack`.
(Nitro, c2771f1 and others)

The game's main loop has been restructured (and repeatedly moved between the
game engine and windowports; we eventually settled on placing it in the game
engine, but it's now split into a number of small functions to make it easier
to follow). (Nitro and 4, b28a198, eab25d3, 0d1caed..79e72a4, 2431fac,
26a7364, cd3d8d2, ba8ede8)

The API for menu creation has been improved. (Nitro, 3da8355)

The game engine no longer cares about which commands are bound to which keys
(beyond making suggestions, so that commands can be added to the engine
without requiring the windowports to be immediately updated to match). (Nitro,
9124795)

The `^P` command is now handled by the windowport, not the server. (Nitro,
fc81b48)

The code now uses "exceptions" (actually `setjmp`/`longjmp`) for handling
escape from nested contexts when things go wrong (either in terms of code
errors, or for things like hangup handling), meaning that a mistake on the
client does not bring the server down and vice versa. (Nitro and 4, 1a88f50,
ce2b50f and others)

The game engine can now do computations "ahead" of the client, in situations
where the client cannot meaningfully contribute to the game, rather than
always waiting for the user to acknowledge a message before continuing; the
client will nonetheless display the gamestate at the time of the message.
(Nitro and 4, b7fbca6, 306911d)

The game engine and interface now both understand the concept of an argument
to a game command.  This made many other fixes possible. (Nitro and 4,
d52dd14, 240faca, d55552b..5e8b9bf and others)

The distribution now comes with source for a game server (that links against
the game engine) that allows the game engine to be on a different physical
computer than the interface, and handles things like user accounts, shared
bones files and so on. (Nitro and 4, f95e83d..e81e925, 7018a13 and others)

It's now possible to have a game open in more than one process at once; moves
made in either will be reflected in the other.  (This is useful for
implementing features like watching and replaying, and is also useful if you
lose a connection because you don't have to wait for the old connection to
time out.) (4, f4ea0a0 and others)

It is now possible to view replays of games, and (for server play) watch live
games.  This can be done from the main menu, or the menu inside a game (for an
"instant replay" feature, which even works inside prompts if the menu is
accessed via a keybinding that isn't needed by the prompt.) (Nitro and 4,
039fc4c, de9ba8b..977fe43, 6e8fb4c..5c91a2b and others)


Error Handling
--------------

When the game malfunctions, it will now dump core on UNIXy systems (in order
to ease debugging), but attempt to continue to execute anyway. (4, 2e14a0c)

The code now contains debug hooks for valgrind (not compiled by default, use
`-DVALGRIND_ANNOTATIONS`, meaning that `impossible`/`panic` will be observable
when running under that debugger). (4, 2383605)

The game can now detect a truncated save file, and automatically recover (via
loading the most recent backup that remains intact). (4, 3cdad9c)


Saves and Replays
-----------------

The game now uses a reproducible random number generator, and saves the seed
in the save file, so that copying a save file and performing the same actions
will lead to the same results.  In addition to making savescumming harder,
this also makes bugs easier to reproduce. (Nitro, 6728cce)

Saves and bones files are now platform-independent, allowing them to be moved
from one system to another. (Nitro and 4, 756ecc9, 6a312e9)

The save file now contains an entire history of the gamestate, tracking diffs
in the binary save (that represents the gamestate) from one command to the
next.  This means that it can be rewound (e.g. for bug reproduction and
recovering broken games), and that the game can be saved just by exiting the
process (meaning that games are unlikely to be lost due to segfaults, hangups,
or similar situations). (4, C342-13, 9923807, 22053c2 and others)

It is now possible to save in the middle of a turn; the game tracks the
choices made during the partially completed turn, and replays them upon
reloading the save. (4, 5c5bf51, 5b6b996)


Packaging, Build System, and Libraries
======================================

Platform and Windowport Support
-------------------------------

The set of supported platforms has been reduced to Linux, Mac OS X, and
Windows.  (Unlike NitroHack, we are not fundamentally opposed to the idea of
porting the code to more platforms, such as BSD, but we currently have no way
to test on them; the code may well work, but we don't know for sure.) (Nitro,
ad815fc..e51ae4f and others)

All the existing windowports were removed, and replaced with a brand new
windowports system, together with a single windowport, `nhcurses`, that forms
the codebase for all currently existing windowports; there is support in the
code for the addition of other windowports, but none currently exist. (Nitro,
4 and Dyna, 0bd8fa6, 39db83c and others)

A new terminal rendering library, libuncursed, is used for drawing on the
terminal, and parsing input back from the user.  Among other things, this
supports widely portable dark gray, a better understanding of cursor keys than
any library previously used with NetHack (including `curses`), ttyrecs that
can be ported from one terminal to another correctly, a color palette that
makes colors more distinct from each other, and support for both Unicode and
IBMgraphics without extra interaction or configuration.  libuncursed has
support for UNIXy terminals generally, for the Windows console, and for
rendering via a fake terminal on SDL on any platform. (4, 24b8a25..c404c3b,
c8a6f31, a7828b5, 7102298, 54b1c17, 9bfb164, 0c0f5ed and others)

A tiles interface has been added via using libuncursed's tiles support. The
SDL backend of libuncursed can be switched between ASCII, Unicode, and tiles
in-game, rather than requiring a separate windowport for tiles and text. (4,
69eda23..1eb1244, 063cd11)

The game's tiles system is now capable of handling multiple sizes of tile,
and transparent tiles, in addition to referring to tiles by name rather than
number (reducing tiles-related mistakes when adding new features to the
game). (Slash'EM and 4, 267b5a1..9e69e72)

The tiles system has been generalized to allow some tiles to exist in some
tilesets, and not in other tilesets (meaning that tilesets can have more
specific tiles than before, e.g. "dwarf valkyrie"). (4, 4c457cd..c173171 and
others)

"Tilesets" that specify a character and colour are now also used for non-tiles
rendering, increasing the flexibility and customizability of the map display.
(4, 3783ed3..a695061 and others)

Users can now override the existing tilesets by placing a replacement version
in the `tilesets` subdirectory of the game config directory (e.g. in
`~/.config/NetHack4/tilesets` on most Linux setups).  (These tilesets can be
produced using a separate program `tilecompile` that can be installed at the
same time as NetHack 4.) (4, 0480c43 and others)

The code is now written to specific levels of library support (in general,
X/Open `_XOPEN_SOURCE=700` and C11, although exceptions are made in some
places, such as the server code), rather than the mix that had built up over
the years in earlier versions. In general, this only affects the windowports;
the game engine aims to be as portable as possible among C11 systems, and
hardly uses platform-specific calls (although there are some exceptions, such
as save file locking). (4, b85714a)


Build System
------------

`makedefs` and the dungeon and level compilers now understand out-of-tree
builds. (Nitro, 60480e9, 34f1e85, 6e9b16b)

A new build system, `aimake` version 3, is now used to build the game.  This
build system makes life easier for maintainers than the old Makefile-based
system (because things can be rearranged internally without breaking
anything), and is also much easier for players building from source, because
it requires substantially less manual intervention than the old system did.
(4, 2912d38 and others)


Testbench
---------

Support for automatically testing the game has been added (on Linux only), and
has caught numerous bugs.  (This needs to be run manually after a build of the
game, and is not included in executable versions.) (4, 8520a8f..a87d42a,
d511a10..e81d005 and others)


Bugfixes against Beta Versions
==============================

Since 4.3-beta2
---------------

Figurines no longer look like monsters in the ASCII and Unicode tilesets.
(e4e9caa)

Since 4.3-beta1
---------------

Being hit by a reflectable attack (with no reflection sources) no longer gives
an error message. (46eae5d)

Recovering from a desync no longer causes further desyncs with every use of
the RNG. (ee16602)

Hangup in a terminal smaller than 80 by 24 no longer causes an infinite loop.
(055ee42)

There have been some fixes to ensure that messages display correctly in corner
cases. (3803ac7..17dcb97, 50cc5d9)

The Enter key on the numeric keypad once again works to step through a
`--More--` prompt. (cd0cee1..7e301ca)

EOF on standard input no longer causes an infinite loop at program exit.
(6af63e8)

The game no longer prints error messages for every item in inventory you can't
wield merely as a result of opening the `w` menu; you now actually have to
wield the item to be told that you can't. (9c8c1e5)

Pressing alt, control, and an opening square bracket is now interpreted
identically to `ESC` (the terminal codes for this, and for `ESC` pressed
twice, differ only in timing, and it's much more likely that we're seeing an
`ESC ESC` that got its timing corrupted due to network lag than that someone
actually pressed that bizarre key combo). (659fc26)

The rules for choking on items have changed from one set of inconsistent
behaviour, to a different set of inconsistent behaviour that never kills a
character if they wouldn't have died in NetHack 3.4.3. (4879834)

The game no longer crashes when an object with a timer (such as a lit oil
lamp) moves between levels without being carried (e.g. falling through a
hole). (d66b190)

Many checks have been added against the player wielding items outside their
inventory. (eefbe63)

The alignment padding in the save file format is no longer considered
interesting for the purpose of binary diffs (meaning that the compression used
on save files compresses a little better). (9a5a308)

Many incorrect assumptions that prevented the game running on Mac OS X were
fixed. (6859f7e, d63ae4a, 79312f0, 4a8488b, 258e155, 0a980ce)

Summoned nasties no longer crash the game when two references to the same
level are stored in different places in memory. (a7cf369)

Various typo fixes to messages. (7ca0627, 39478da, f58ce5f, d70bf91, 383f421)

Identification of items by the "Do you want your possessions identified?"
screen no longer exercises Wisdom (which triggered the desync detector,
because the players' stats aren't meant to be changing at that point).
(60d28cc)

Worn items no longer remain worn after the player's death (which was
triggering the desync detector, whose reaction was to undo the death to get
the game back into a sane state!) (990c00d)

Amulets of change no longer cause a desync. (92d477a)

Automatic recovery of save files has been disabled in situations where it
would rewind the vast majority of the game (e.g. to before the first turn).
(0936020)

Venom now always breaks upon being thrown (so that it can no longer be picked
up and thrown back some proportion of the time). (d01be1d)

The client no longer enters an infinite loop on hangup if it disagrees with
the server as to whether there's a game running. (099033d)

The performance of screen updates has been improved by reducing the amount of
redundant redrawing. (4ae58d5)

Level regions, staircases, and the like are again defined in a consistent way,
meaning that falling onto a level like the Castle will place the character
over the left hand side (as intended), rather than sometimes at the right or
top or bottom.  Note: the game attempts to detect and fix save files that were
corrupted by this sort of problem, and because it would be a false positive,
stairs will not function in the top-left corner of the map (but they never
generate there anyway). (8f01d76, d76ac60, e02902b)

Wielding a cockatrice corpse no longer disregards the presence of gloves.
(64baef1)

The parser for the spell-adjustment menu on `+` has been fixed to correctly
distinguish valid from invalid input. (afbeafc)

In server play, it's now possible to start a new game after watching somebody
else's game. (805b28e)

If a game crashes during the game over sequence, loading the replay will now
detect this and automatically attempt to reconstruct the game over sequence
(creating an xlogfile entry and dumplog that might otherwise have been
missing). (226daa1, 3301166..aeae4b0 and others)

Much of the server daemon code was replaced by offloading the work to `inetd`
instead.  This solved the server reliability problems that nethack4.org was
having, and also makes debugging a server locally much more convenient.
(472d025..78aa8b8)

If a user rebinds 5 (on the main or numeric keypad) to a movement direction
(overriding its default meaning), that's now respected at direction prompts.
(e389814)

Yes/no and similar prompts no longer corrupt one byte of memory. (8771d1b)

Inventory letters no longer become corrupted in the corner case where a player
has a full inventory with the last item picked inhabiting slot `Z`, drops that
item, then picks up a different item that's never previously been in their
inventory.  (If your game is affected by this bug, you can fix the issue by
dropping your entire inventory, then picking the items up again.) (441e50d)

A Strength score of 18/100 no longer displays as `18/10`, like a Strength
score of 18/10 would. (50251de)

Monsters that have been deleted from the map (currently recorded, as in the
NetHack 3 series, by setting their HP to a negative number) no longer have the
ability to spontaneously undelete themselves via regenerating HP over time.
(fad1d3a)

Removing gauntlets of fumbling now again causes you to stop fumbling
immediately, rather than with a d20 turn delay. (ee4ac33)

Seeking forwards 50 turns in a replay now seeks to the next available seekable
point in the replay if there are no seekable points within 50 turns. (7683f53)

Menus are no longer sometimes drawn offscreen (this case most commonly
happened with itemactions menus in cases where the object name was wider than
the inventory sidebar). (9377bc1, 643b6e0)

The client no longer crashes upon trying to open the extended command
menu. (c19e6cb)

Many pluralisation problems have been fixed, especially with respect to items
that come in pairs (such as gloves). (3716cb1)

Resizing the client is now more reliable, both in a terminal and when using an
SDL fake terminal or tiles view. (8c39d1a)

New interface options have been added to make menus and prompts in NetHack 4
render more like they did in the NetHack 3 series. (117a1cb, ebf177e, 94a38cf,
80d35f4)

Workarounds to bugs in various terminals were added. (141c307)

`#name` no longer uses the Sting/Orcrist codepath for other artifacts (meaning
that you could create arbitrary artifacts if you owned the corresponding base
item). (6c2cf58)

It's no longer possible to use wizard-mode teleport outside wizard mode.
(f2f91a0)

Purple worms summoned by shriekers no longer appear outside the map. (44e5bea)

Wounded legs no longer permanently reduce Dexterity. (1e946d8)

Engravings are now again capable of eroding. (ea7ae17)

Grayswandir now again blocks hallucination. (700b320)

The items on the grappling hook menu again correctly do what their labels
indicate they do. (7c49679)

Shopkeepers can once again identify their shops if a bones file was left for
their level, then loaded at a different depth, or if they die but need their
monster data saved in case they are reanimated. (8ffdb7b, aad3622)

The game no longer crashes trying to show help information if a --More-- was
forced during the creation of a dialog box (e.g. because that dialog box would
cover up existing messages). (3f33481)

The #adjust command no longer desyncs the game when used on a loadstone in the
53rd or later inventory slot. (25c1c27)

The high score table will no longer give an incorrect position for your game
on the scoreboard (although it might not be able to highlight the position
your game came in at, the scoreboard will at least be updated
correctly). (120174d)

The save file format has been optimized to use less disk space. (af3161b,
8b2482d)

Players no longer start with a free 10 points of Defence; starting Defence has
been reduced back to 3.4.3 levels. (I wonder why nobody reported that one
earlier?) (27b7c41)

Brandings now work correctly when viewing the character's memory of levels
other than the current dungeon level. (cb7926c)

Failure to load a bones file, and toggling autopickup, no longer leak
memory. (17834e6, 65a76b3)

Non-corpses can no longer be tinned (causing odd effects or crashing the
game). (5c66591)

Direction keys that are unbound in the key bindings editor will no longer
rebind themselves upon restarting the NetHack 4 process. (97b2cce)

When eating a mimic corpse, the game no longer waits for input at a time when
the player cannot reasonably give input. (3d10ac9)

Some rendering issues with the cursor in the SDL backend were fixed. (2bf3d76)

The game now allows a choice of color palettes for the 16 colors it uses
(which will not work in all terminals). (207a872, 0b1fc22)

The random number generator is now seeded correctly for the purpose of
generating random characters on Mac OS X. (530125f..7e0353a)

The keymap dialog box now allows for quick rebinding of subsets of keys (such
as `hjklyubn` or `1234567890`). (b0c2d7b..8a367e7)

When a game desyncs or panics (or something similar happens), relevant debug
data is now shown inside the resulting dialog box, rather than beforehand, and
more debug information is given than before. (1a89562)

Tame monsters no longer hoard weapons. (3a9acbd)

The grudge between `d` and `f` monsters now only affects dogs and cats
specifically (not, say, wolves and jaguars). (1e6d378)

Cockatrices no longer attack pets that would refuse to attack them (to avoid a
situation where a monster can't fight back); this was a regression
from 3.4.3. (9c0c3fa)

Shift- and Ctrl-direction now work correctly at position prompts. (55cbd7e)

Several bugs were fixed in the covetous monster AI. (184e511, 5a21c28)

Some bugs where polymorphed monsters looked like their original form on the
map, not their current form, were fixed. (ce81809)

Monsters again consider plot-critical items underneath meditating monsters to
not have spawned yet (this is mostly intended to prevent covetous monsters
waking up the Wizard of Yendor). (6d18c16)

Some bugs in the `pushweapon` option, and in wielding more generally, have
been fixed. (9525afc)

Detecting traps using a crystal ball no longer reveals all doors on the
level. (0c93cf3)

Falling into a pit now again correctly reduces your vision range. (5b23218)

The game now distinguishes between the player and the player's square in some
situations where it matters (e.g. while being engulfed). (0818d79)

Tame monsters that reject the use of a ranged attack (so as not to hit their
owner) now consider melee attacks instead, rather than just doing nothing.
(91bde50)

Pacifist movement now uses remembered rather than actual information to reject
attacks on invisible monsters; although it still will never actually attack an
invisible monster, you can no longer get information on whether it's still
there or not without spending a turn. (7a1f633)

Tame monsters are more cautious in their spell selection. (a717609, ef2a617)

Some problems with farlook have been fixed. (230e7bf, 21ece58, 898eff3,
98585ed)

The endgame disclose screen now correctly distinguishes between extinction and
genocide. (e35cb28)

The game again reacts sensibly to attempted attacks on long worm tails in
unusual visibility conditions. (709f260)

The list of available timezones has been adjusted to cover all the timezones
that are currently in use. (e598cb8)

When watching two consecutive games, information from the first will not spill
over to the inventory sidebar in the second. (cb08a79)

Polymorphing items will no longer polymorph a golem created from those
items. (55ed3a3)

When food randomly becomes rotten, it will no longer mark the entire stack as
rotten. (91603f8)

The inventory sidebar can no longer see underwater items unless your character
can see them. (a8aa73a)

The "What item do you want to charge?" menu no longer leaks information when
the character is blind. (13d80ec)

Slow operations (like loading save files) now have a loading bar, that
prevents network connections timing out during the load. (637bfa2)

Viewing the credits (development history) from the help menu now again
works. (3c6d5dd, 2965100..dc3e040)

The mouse wheel now works when it's over blank space in a menu, not just when
it's over a visible character. (df2ce1b)

When a monster's attitude towards the player changes, the game now does a
better job of updating any visual indicators of that immediately (such as a
blue or brown background, with the default text-based tilesets). (9adcd5f)

The game no longer gives misleading feedback when the `c` command is used on
the old location of an invisible monster that has since moved away. (dc0184d)

`#adjust` now again abbreviates the list of unused inventory letters, rather
than listing them all. (0031931)

The game no longer crashes when a wielded wand is destroyed by
lightning. (1f52b5a)

Hangup at the genocide prompt no longer causes an infinite loop. (6ca461c)

Being punished while engulfed is now treated the same way as being engulfed
while punished, rather than crashing. (1e4324a)

Overflowing the inventory weight no longer crashes the game. (13bb37d)

The game no longer crashes if you kick a monster with a passive attack, kill
it, then die from the recoil damage. (c6c5ae5)

The game no longer crashes when a monster kills another monster in certain
unusual ways (touch of Death, or monster spell), and also achieves an HP kill
on the same monster in the same attack sequence. (7c8d6e0)
