=for comment
Last modified by Alex Smith, 2015-03-10
NetHack may be freely redistributed.  See license for details.

=encoding utf8

=for aimake manualname dgn_comp
=for aimake manualsection 6

=head1 NAME

dgn_comp - NetHack dungeon compiler

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dgn_comp> [I<file>]

If no arguments are given, it reads standard input.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I<dgn_comp> is a dungeon compiler for NetHack version 3.2 and higher.  It
takes a description file as an argument and produces a dungeon "script" 
that is to be loaded by NetHack at runtime.

The purpose of this tool is to provide NetHack administrators and
implementors with a convenient way to create a custom dungeon for the
game, without having to recompile the entire world.

=head1 GRAMMAR

C<DUNGEON:> I<name> I<bonesmarker> (I<base>,I<rand>) [I<%age>]

where I<name> is the dungeon name, I<bonesmarker> is a letter for
marking bones files, (I<base>, I<rand>) is the number of levels, and
I<%age> is its percentage chance of being generated (if absent, 100%
chance).

C<DESCRIPTION:> I<tag>

where I<tag> is currently one of C<HELLISH>, C<MAZELIKE>, or
C<ROGUELIKE>.

C<ALIGNMENT:>|C<LEVALIGN:> [C<lawful>|C<neutral>|C<chaotic>|C<unaligned>]

gives the alignment of the dungeon/level (default is unaligned).

C<ENTRY:> I<level>

is the dungeon entry point.  The dungeon connection attaches at this
level of the given dungeon.  If the value of I<level> is negative, the
entry level is calculated from the bottom of the dungeon, with -1
being the last level.  If this line is not present in a dungeon
description, the entry level defaults to 1.

C<PROTOFILE:> I<name>

gives the prototypical name for dungeon level files in this dungeon.
For example, the C<PROTOFILE> name for the dungeon "Vlad's Tower" is
C<tower>.

C<LEVEL:> I<name> I<bonesmarker> @ (I<base>, I<rand>) [I<%age>]

where I<name> is the level name, I<bonesmarker> is a letter for
marking bones files, (I<base>, I<rand>) is the location and I<%age> is
the generation percentage, as above.

C<RNDLEVEL:> I<name> I<bonesmarker> @ (I<base>, I<rand>) [I<%age>] I<rndlevs>

where I<name> is the level name, I<bonesmarker> is a letter for
marking bones files, (I<base>, I<rand>) is the location and I<%age> is
the generation percentage, as above, and I<rndlevs> is the number of
similar levels available to choose from.

C<CHAINLEVEL:> I<name> I<bonesmarker> I<prev_name> + (I<base>, I<rand>) [I<%age>]

where I<name> is the level name, I<bonesmarker> is a letter for
marking bones files, I<prev_name> is the name of a level defined
previously, (I<base>, I<rand>) is the I<offset> from the level being
chained from, and I<%age> is the generation percentage.

C<RNDCHAINLEVEL:>  I<name> I<bonesmarker> I<prev_name> + (I<base>, I<rand>) [I<%age>] I<rndlevs>

where I<name> is the level name, I<bonesmarker> is a letter for
marking bones files, I<prev_name> is the name of a level defined
previously, (I<base>, I<rand>) is the I<offset> from the level being
chained from, and I<%age> is the generation percentage, and I<rndlevs>
is the number of similar levels available to choose from.

C<LEVELDESC:> I<type>

where I<type> is the level type (see C<DESCRIPTION>, above). The
I<type> is used to override any pre-set value used to describe the
entire dungeon, for this level only.

C<BRANCH:> I<name> @ (I<base>, I<rand>) [C<stair>|C<no_up>|C<no_down>|C<portal>] [C<up>|C<down>]

where I<name> is the name of the dungeon to branch to, and (I<base>,
I<rand>) is the location of the branch.

The last two optional arguments are the branch type and branch
direction.  The type of a branch can be a two-way stair connection, a
one-way stair connection, or a magic portal.  A one-way stair is
described by the types C<no_up> and C<no_down> which specify which
stair direction is missing.  The default branch type is C<stair>.  The
direction for a stair can be either up or down; direction is not
applicable to portals.  The default direction is C<down>.

CHAINBRANCH: I<name> I<prev_name> + (I<base>, I<rand>) [C<stair>|C<no_up>|C<no_down>|C<portal>] [C<up>|C<down>]

where I<name> is the name of the dungeon to branch to, I<prev_name> is
the name of a previously defined level, and (I<base>, I<rand>) is the
I<offset> from the level being chained from.  The optional branch type
and direction are the same as described above.

=head1 GENERIC RULES

Each dungeon must have a unique I<bonesmarker>, and each special level
must have a I<bonesmarker> unique within its dungeon (letters may be
reused in different dungeons).

If the I<bonesmarker> has the special value "none", no bones files
will be created for that level or dungeon.

The value I<base> may be in the range of 1 to C<MAXLEVEL> (as defined
in F<global.h>).

The value I<rand> may be in the range of -1 to C<MAXLEVEL>.

If I<rand> is -1 it will be replaced with the value
(num_dunlevs(dungeon) - base) during the load process (ie. from here
to the end of the dungeon).

If I<rand> is 0 the level is located absolutely at I<base>.

Branches don't have a probability.  Dungeons do.  If a dungeon fails
to be generated during load, all its levels and branches are skipped.

No level or branch may be chained from a level with a percentage generation
probability.  This is to prevent non-resolution during the load.
In addition, no branch may be made from a dungeon with a percentage
generation probability for the same reason.

As a general rule using the dungeon compiler:

If a dungeon has a I<protofile> name associated with it
(e.g. C<tower>) that file will be used.

If a special level is present, it will override the above rule and
the appropriate file will be loaded.

If neither of the above are present, the standard generator will
take over and make a "normal" level.

A level alignment, if present, will override the alignment of the
dungeon that it exists within.

=head1 EXAMPLE

Here is the current syntax of the dungeon compiler's "language":

 #
 #       The dungeon description file for the "standard" original
 #       3.0 NetHack.
 #
 DUNGEON:        "The Dungeons of Doom" "D" (25, 5)
 LEVEL:          "rogue" "none" @ (15, 4)
 LEVEL:          "oracle" "none" @ (5, 7)
 LEVEL:          "bigroom" "B" @ (12, 3) 15
 LEVEL:          "medusa" "none" @ (20, 5)
 CHAINLEVEL:     "castle" "medusa" + (1, 4)
 CHAINBRANCH:    "Hell" "castle" + (0, 0) no_down
 BRANCH:         "The Astral Plane" @ (1, 0) no_down up

 DUNGEON:        "Hell" "H" (25, 5)
 DESCRIPTION:    mazelike
 DESCRIPTION:    hellish
 BRANCH:         "Vlad's Tower" @ (13, 5) up
 LEVEL:          "wizard" "none" @ (15, 10)
 LEVEL:          "fakewiz" "A" @ (5, 5)
 LEVEL:          "fakewiz" "B" @ (10, 5)
 LEVEL:          "fakewiz" "C" @ (15, 5)
 LEVEL:          "fakewiz" "D" @ (20, 5)
 LEVEL:          "fakewiz" "E" @ (25, 5)

 DUNGEON:        "Vlad's Tower" "T" (3, 0)
 PROTOFILE:      "tower"
 DESCRIPTION:    mazelike
 ENTRY:          -1

 DUNGEON:        "The Astral Plane" "A" (1, 0)
 DESCRIPTION:    mazelike
 PROTOFILE:      "endgame"

=head1 NOTES

Lines beginning with '#' are considered comments.

A special level must be explicitly aligned.  The alignment of the dungeon
it is in only applies to non-special levels within that dungeon.

=head1 AUTHOR

M. Stephenson (from the level compiler by Jean-Christophe Collet).

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<lev_comp(6)>, L<nethack(6)>, L<nethack4(6)>

=head1 BUGS

Probably infinite.
