=for comment
Last modified by Alex Smith, 2015-03-16
.
Copyright (C) 2014, 2015 Alex Smith
NetHack can be freely redistributed.  See license for details.

=encoding utf8

=for aimake manualsection 6

=for aimake manualname nethack4

=head1 NAME

nethack4 - dungeon exploration game

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<nethack4> [B<--interface> I<interface>] [I<options>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

NetHack 4 is a "roguelike" computer game in which you control an
adventurer delving into a dungeon to find the Amulet of Yendor.  Back
when the idea of running a computer game on an actual computer, rather
than a games console, was still relatively new, most games were text
adventures in which you communicated with the game through a command
line; Rogue was the first game to use a more screen-oriented approach
which represents the view onscreen with ASCII art.  NetHack is perhaps
the best known successor to Rogue, and is very much written in the
same spirit.  NetHack 4 is an attempt to restart NetHack devlopment
after over 10 years of dormancy, with numerous interface improvements
and bugfixes.

If you are just learning the game, it is best to use a very very high
terminal; if there is sufficient room, a reminder of the relevant
controls will be shown in the bottom-left corner of the screen.  Some
of the most useful are C<?> for help, C<!> for a menu, and C<i> to use
items; you can move and attack with C<hjklyubn> (L<vi(1)>-style),
C<42867913> on the numeric keypad (you may need to turn off NumLock),
or Left/Up/Right/Down/Home/End/PgUp/PgDn.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--interface> I<plugin>

Choose the libuncursed plugin that will be used to render the game.
The default, which is always available, is C<tty> on Linux and UNIX,
and C<wincon> on Windows; these both give a character-based interface
in a terminal.  If it is installed, you could also use C<sdl> for a
"fake terminal" or graphical tiles interface (depending on the setting
of the in-game C<graphics> option).

This option can also be set by changing the name of the executable (or
using a symbolic link); an executable named C<nethack4-sdl> defaults
to the C<sdl> plugin, and so on.

Because this option is parsed by libuncursed, not NetHack 4 proper, it
must come first on the command line.

=item B<-k>

Start the game client in connection-only mode; it will automatically
attempt to connect to a server daemon running on localhost, prompting
for a name and password, and exiting if it cannot.  This option is
designed for creating a client for public servers.

=item B<-D>

When creating new games, create them in debug mode.  These games do
not count for the high score table, and allow a wide range of debug
commands to be use to help test the game.  You could also use this to
experiment with the game mechanics.

=item B<-X>

When creating new games, create them in explore mode.  This is
designed to allow less experienced players see more of the game; you
start with a free wand of wishing and an infinite supply of
lifesaving.

=item B<-u> I<name>

=item B<-p> I<role>

=item B<-r> I<race>

Specifies the name, role, and/or race for your character in newly
created games.

=item B<-@>

Specifies that newly created characters should be chosen at random.

=item B<-H> I<playfield>

=item B<-U> I<userdir>

Overrides the game playfield (where NetHack 4 stores data common to
all users) or the user directory (where NetHack 4 stores data specific
to an individual user), respectively.  This is intended for use with
L<dgamelaunch(8)>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<hack(6)>, L<rogue(6)>, L<nethack(6)>, L<dgamelaunch(8)>,
L<http://nethack4.org>

=head1 BUGS

Numerous.  If you find a bug, or want to peruse the list of bugs that
other players have found, see the bug tracker at
L<http://trac.nethack4.org>.

=cut
